[
  "1. Fußball-Club Nürnberg Verein für Leibesübungen e. V. , often called 1. FC Nürnberg ( German pronunciation: [ɛfˌtseː ˈnʏʁnbɛʁk] , English: 1. Football Club Nuremberg ), is a German sports club based in Nuremberg , Bavaria. It is best known for its men's football team, who currently compete in the 2. Bundesliga . Founded in 1900, the club initially competed in the Southern German championship , winning their first title in 1916. Their first German championship was won in 1920. Before the inauguration of the Bundesliga in 1963, 1. FCN won a further 11 regional championships, including the Oberliga Süd formed in 1945, and were German champions another seven times. The club has won the Bundesliga once and the DFB-Pokal four times.",
  "77 Records was a British record company and label established in 1957 by Doug Dobell , [ 1 ] the proprietor of 'Dobell's Jazz Record Shop' at 77 Charing Cross Road , London. The label specialised in folk , blues , and jazz .",
  "A Bug's Life (stylized in all lowercase) is a 1998 American animated comedy film produced by Pixar Animation Studios for Walt Disney Pictures . It is Pixar's second feature-length film , following Toy Story (1995). The film was directed by John Lasseter , co-directed by Andrew Stanton , and produced by Darla K. Anderson and Kevin Reher, from a screenplay written by Stanton, Donald McEnery, and Bob Shaw, and a story conceived by Lasseter, Stanton, and Joe Ranft . It stars the voices of Dave Foley , Kevin Spacey , Julia Louis-Dreyfus , and Hayden Panettiere . In the film, a misfit ant named Flik looks for \"tough warriors\" to save his ant colony from a protection racket run by a gang of grasshoppers . However, the \"warriors\" he brings back are a troupe of Circus Bugs. The film's plot was initially inspired by Aesop 's fable The Ant and the Grasshopper . [ 5 ] [ 6 ]",
  "A Gang Story ( French : Les Lyonnais ) is a 2011 French drama film directed by Olivier Marchal . Michel Neyret was the real-life inspiration for this film. [ 2 ] In 2020, a Hindi -language Indian remake titled Yaara was released.",
  "Aaron Copland ( / ˈ k oʊ p l ə n d / , KOHP -lənd ; [ 1 ] [ 2 ] November 14, 1900 – December 2, 1990) was an American composer, critic, writer, teacher, pianist, and conductor of his own and other American music. Copland was referred to by his peers and critics as the \"Dean of American Composers\". The open, slowly changing harmonies in much of his music are typical of what many consider the sound of American music, evoking the vast American landscape and pioneer spirit. He is best known for the works he wrote in the 1930s and 1940s in a deliberately accessible style often referred to as \"populist\" and which he called his \"vernacular\" style. [ 3 ] Works in this vein include the ballets Appalachian Spring , Billy the Kid and Rodeo , his Fanfare for the Common Man and Third Symphony . In addition to his ballets and orchestral works, he produced music in many other genres, including chamber music, vocal works, opera, and film scores.",
  "Aarwangen Castle ( German : Schloss Aarwangen ) is a castle in the municipality of Aarwangen of the canton of Bern in Switzerland .  It is a Swiss heritage site of national significance . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] I",
  "The abaya ( colloquially and more commonly, Arabic : عباية ʿabāyah , especially in Literary Arabic : عباءة ʿabā'ah ; plural عبايات ʿabāyāt , عباءات ʿabā'āt ), sometimes also called an aba , is a simple, loose over- garment , essentially a robe -like dress, worn by some women in the Muslim world including most of the Middle East , North Africa , and parts of the Horn of Africa . [ 1 ] Traditional abayas are usually black and may either be a large square of fabric draped from the shoulders or head or a long kaftan . The abaya covers the whole body except the head (sometimes), feet, and hands. It can be worn with the niqāb , a face veil covering all but the eyes. Some women also wear long black gloves , so their hands are also covered. Commonly, the abaya is worn on special occasions, such as mosque visits, Islamic holiday celebrations for Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha , and also during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan .",
  "The Academy of San Carlos ( Spanish : Academia de San Carlos ), formerly also known as the National School of Fine Arts ( Spanish : Escuela Nacional de Bellas Artes ), is an art academy in Mexico City that historically played an important role in the development of Mexican art and architecture . Founded in 1781 as the School of Engraving, it was the first major art school and the first art museum in the Americas .",
  "Africa is the world's second-largest and second-most populous continent after Asia . At about 30.3 million km 2 (11.7 million square miles) including adjacent islands, it covers 20% of Earth 's land area and 6% of its total surface area. [ 9 ] With nearly 1.4 billion people as of 2021, it accounts for about 18% of the world's human population . Africa's population is the youngest among all the continents; [ 10 ] [ 11 ] the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4. [ 12 ] Based on 2024 projections, Africa's population will exceed 3.8 billion people by 2100. [ 13 ] Africa is the least wealthy inhabited continent per capita and second-least wealthy by total wealth, ahead of Oceania . Scholars have attributed this to different factors including geography , climate , [ 14 ] corruption , [ 14 ] colonialism , the Cold War , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] and neocolonialism . Despite this low concentration of wealth, recent economic expansion and a large and young population make Africa an important economic market in the broader global context, and Africa has a large quantity of natural resources .",
  "African American  literature is the body of literature produced in the United States by writers of African descent. Phillis Wheatley was an enslaved African woman who became the first African American to publish a book of poetry, which was published  in 1773. Her collection, was titled Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral . Olaudah Equiano (c. 1745–1797)  was an African man who wrote The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano , an autobiography published in 1789 that became one of the first influential works about the transatlantic slave trade and the experiences of enslaved Africans. His work was published sixteen years after Phillis Wheatley 's work (c. 1753–1784).",
  "Irrigation (also referred to as watering of plants ) is the practice of applying controlled amounts of water to land to help grow crops , landscape plants , and lawns . Irrigation has been a key aspect of agriculture for over 5,000 years and has been developed by many cultures around the world. Irrigation helps to grow crops, maintain landscapes, and revegetate disturbed soils in dry areas and during times of below-average rainfall. In addition to these uses, irrigation is also employed to protect crops from frost , [ 1 ] suppress weed growth in grain fields, and prevent soil consolidation . It is also used to cool livestock , reduce dust , dispose of sewage , and support mining operations. Drainage , which involves the removal of surface and sub-surface water from a given location, is often studied in conjunction with irrigation.",
  "An aircraft ( pl. : aircraft) is a vehicle that is able to fly by gaining support from the air . It counters the force of gravity by using either static lift or the dynamic lift of an airfoil , [ 1 ] or, in a few cases, direct downward thrust from its engines. Common examples of aircraft include airplanes , rotorcraft , helicopters , airships (including blimps ), gliders , paramotors , and hot air balloons . [ 2 ] Part 1 [ 3 ] (Definitions and Abbreviations) of Subchapter A of Chapter I of Title 14 of the U. S. Code of Federal Regulations states that aircraft \"means a device that is used or intended to be used for flight in the air.\"",
  "Alcantara is the brand name of a synthetic textile with a soft, suede-like microfibre pile, noted for its durability. Alcantara was developed in the 1970s by Miyoshi Okamoto and initially manufactured by the Italian company Alcantara. The term has an Arabic root ( Arabic : القنطرة , romanized : al-qantara ) and means \"the bridge\".",
  "A kasbah ( / ˈ k æ z b ɑː / , also US : / ˈ k ɑː z -/ ; Arabic : قصبة , romanized : qaṣaba , lit. 'fortress', Arabic pronunciation: [qasˤaba] , Maghrebi Arabic : [qasˤba] ), also spelled qasbah , qasba , qasaba , or casbah , is a fortress , most commonly the citadel or fortified quarter of a city. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] It is also equivalent to the term alcazaba in Spanish ( Spanish: [alkaˈθaβa] ), which is derived from the same Arabic word. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] By extension, the term can also refer to a medina quarter , particularly in Algeria . In various languages, the Arabic word, or local words borrowed from the Arabic word, can also refer to a settlement, a fort, a watchtower , or a blockhouse .",
  "Alexandra Ioana Stan (born 10 June 1989) is a Romanian singer. Born in Constanța , she made her worldwide breakthrough with the 2010 single \" Mr. Saxobeat \", which was written and produced by Marcel Prodan and Andrei Nemirschi. They had previously discovered Stan at a karaoke bar in 2009 and signed her to their label, Maan Records. \"Mr. Saxobeat\" had followed the singer's debut single, \" Lollipop (Param Pam Pam) \" (2009), which brought her moderate fame in Romania. \"Mr. Saxobeat\" quickly achieved commercial success locally and abroad, reaching number one in several countries and gathering various certifications . Saxobeats , Stan's debut studio album, was released in August 2011 and features the follow-up singles \" Get Back (ASAP) \" (2011) and \" Lemonade \" (2012), which had moderate success in Europe.",
  "Amitabh Bachchan [ a ] ( né Srivastava ; [ 1 ] 11 October 1942 [ 7 ] ) is an Indian actor who works in Hindi cinema . He is often considered one of the greatest, most accomplished and commercially successful actors in the history of Indian cinema . [ 8 ] With a cinematic career spanning over five decades, he has played in over 200 films . Bachchan is often hailed as the Shahenshah of Bollywood , Sadi Ke Mahanayak (translated as \"Greatest actor of the century\" in Hindi), Star of the Millennium, or simply Big B. [ 9 ] His dominance in the Indian film industry during the 1970s–80s led the French director François Truffaut to describe it as a \"one-man industry\". [ 10 ] He is a recipient of several accolades including six National Film Awards and sixteen Filmfare Awards .",
  "Amjad Khan (12 November 1940 – 27 July 1992) was a renowned Indian actor and film director. [ 1 ] He worked in over 132 films in a career spanning nearly twenty years. He was the son of the actor Jayant . He gained popularity for villainous roles in mostly Hindi films, the most famous among his enacted roles being Gabbar Singh in the 1975 film Sholay [ 2 ] and of Dilawar in Muqaddar Ka Sikandar (1978).",
  "Anasyrma ( Ancient Greek : ἀνάσυρμα ) composed of ἀνά ana \"up, against, back\", and σύρμα syrma \"a dragging motion\"; plural: anasyrmata ( ἀνασύρματα ), also called anasyrmos ( ἀνασυρμός ), [ 1 ] is the gesture of lifting the skirt or kilt . It is used in connection with certain religious rituals , eroticism, and lewd jokes (see, for example, Baubo ). The term is used in describing corresponding works of art.",
  "Basal angiosperms Core angiosperms Flowering plants are plants that bear flowers and fruits , and form the clade Angiospermae ( / ˌ æ n dʒ i ə ˈ s p ər m iː / ). [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The term 'angiosperm' is derived from the Greek words ἀγγεῖον / angeion ('container, vessel') and σπέρμα / sperma ('seed'), meaning that the seeds are enclosed within a fruit. The group was formerly called Magnoliophyta . [ 7 ]",
  "Anime ( Japanese : アニメ , IPA: [aꜜɲime] ⓘ [ a ] ; derived from a shortening of English animation ) is hand-drawn and computer-generated animation originating from Japan . Outside Japan and in English, anime refers specifically to animation produced in Japan. [ 1 ] However, anime , in Japan and in Japanese, describes all animated works, regardless of style or origin. Many works of animation with a similar style to Japanese animation are also produced outside Japan. Video games sometimes also feature themes and art styles that are sometimes labelled as anime.",
  "AOL (formerly a company known as AOL Inc. and originally known as America Online ) [ 1 ] is an American web portal and online service provider based in New York City, and a brand marketed by Yahoo! Inc.",
  "Apéritifs ( / ə ˈ p ɛr ɪ t iː f / ; French: [apeʁitif] ) and digestifs ( / d iː ʒ ɛ ˈ s t iː f / ) are drinks, typically alcoholic , that are normally served respectively before and after a meal. An apéritif is an alcoholic beverage usually served before a meal to stimulate the appetite , and is usually dry rather than sweet. Common choices for an apéritif are vermouth ; champagne ; pastis ; gin ; ouzo ; fino ; amontillado or other styles of dry sherry (but not usually cream or oloroso blended sherry, which is very sweet and rich).",
  "Aperol ( / ˈ æ p ər oʊ l / AP -ər-ohl , Italian: [ˈaːperol] ) is an Italian bitter apéritif made with gentian , rhubarb , and cinchona , among other ingredients. It has a clear orange hue. [ 1 ] Its name comes from apero , a French slang word for 'apéritif'. [ 2 ]",
  "The applied arts are all the arts that apply design and decoration to everyday and essentially practical objects in order to make them aesthetically pleasing. [ 1 ] The term is used in distinction to the fine arts , which are those that produce objects with no practical use, whose only purpose is to be beautiful or stimulate the intellect in some way. In practice, the two often overlap.  Applied arts largely overlap with decorative arts , and the modern making of applied art is usually called design .",
  "Aragoto ( 荒事 ) , or 'rough style', [ 1 ] is a style of kabuki acting that uses exaggerated, dynamic kata (forms or movements) and speech. Aragoto roles are characterised by the bold red or blue makeup ( kumadori ) worn by actors, as well as their enlarged and padded costumes. [ 2 ] The term \"aragoto\" is an abbreviation of the term \"aramushagoto\" , which literally means \"wild-warrior style\". [ 3 ]",
  "An architect is a person who plans, designs, and oversees the construction of buildings. [ 1 ] To practice architecture means to provide services in connection with the design of buildings and the space within the site surrounding the buildings that have human occupancy or use as their principal purpose. [ 2 ] Etymologically, the term architect derives from the Latin architectus , [ 3 ] which derives from the Greek [ 4 ] ( arkhi - , chief + tekton , builder), i.e., chief builder. [ 5 ]",
  "Architectural Engineer (PE) is a professional engineering designation in the United States . The architectural engineer applies the knowledge and skills of broader engineering disciplines to the design, construction, operation, maintenance, and renovation of buildings and their component systems while paying careful attention to their effects on the surrounding environment. [ 1 ]",
  "Argan oil is a plant oil produced from the kernels of the argan tree ( Argania spinosa L.), which is indigenous to Morocco and southwestern Algeria . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] In Morocco, argan oil is used to dip bread at breakfast or to drizzle on couscous or pasta. It is also used for cosmetic purposes. [ 3 ] [ 4 ]",
  "Art history is, briefly, the history of art —or the study of a specific type of objects created in the past. [ 1 ] Traditionally, the discipline of art history emphasized painting, drawing, sculpture, architecture, ceramics and decorative arts; yet today, art history examines broader aspects of visual culture , including the various visual and conceptual outcomes related to an ever-evolving definition of art. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Art history encompasses the study of objects created by different cultures around the world and throughout history that convey meaning, importance or serve usefulness primarily through visual representations.",
  "Painting is a visual art , which is characterized by the practice of applying paint , pigment , color or other medium to a solid surface (called \"matrix\" [ 1 ] or \" support \"). [ 2 ] The medium is commonly applied to the base with a brush , but other implements, such as knives, sponges, and airbrushes , may be used. One who produces paintings is called a painter .",
  "Atheism , in the broadest sense, is an absence of belief in the existence of deities . Less broadly, atheism is a rejection of the belief that any deities exist. In an even narrower sense, atheism is specifically the position that there are no deities. Atheism is contrasted with theism , which is the belief that at least one deity exists.",
  "\" Baa, Baa, Black Sheep \" is an English nursery rhyme , the earliest printed version of which dates from around 1744. The words have barely changed in two and a half centuries. It is sung to a variant of the 18th-century French melody \" Ah! vous dirai-je, maman \".",
  "Baldegg railway station ( German : Bahnhof Baldegg ) is a railway station in the municipality of Hochdorf , in the Swiss canton of Lucerne . It is an intermediate stop on the standard gauge Seetal line of Swiss Federal Railways .",
  "The Baltic song festivals ( Estonian : laulupidu , Latvian : dziesmu svētki , Lithuanian : dainų šventė ) are traditional amateur song and dance festivals in the Baltic States included in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List .",
  "A bamboula is a type of drum made from a rum barrel with skin stretched over one end. [ 1 ] It is also a dance accompanied by music from these drums. Originating in Africa, the bamboula form appears in a Haitian song in 1757 and bamboula became a dance syncopation performed to the rhythm of the drum during festivals and ceremonies in Haiti (then Saint-Domingue ). It was then exported to the United States (notably Mobile, Alabama , and the Virgin Islands ) through Louisiana , by the slaves who were deported to New Orleans [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] during the 18th century with the arrival of the displaced French settlers of the island of San Domingo especially after the Haitian Revolution . The slaves congregated on the Congo Square to the edge of the area of the French Quarter of New Orleans to dance the bamboula.",
  "The Barbarastollen underground archive is an underground archive intended to preserve Germany ’s cultural heritage from man-made or natural disaster . The Barbarastollen is located in a disused mine near Freiburg im Breisgau , Baden-Württemberg , Germany . It holds microfilms with about 1.12 billion images from German archives and museums. [ 1 ]",
  "Baselland Transport AG ( BLT ) is a Swiss public transport operator in the cantons of Basel-Land , Basel-Stadt , Solothurn and in France . The BLT was founded in 1974, and is owned by the Canton of Basel-Land, located to the south of the city. It transports some 48 million passengers per year, using a fleet of 64 buses and 100 trams over a network of 165 kilometres (103 mi) of bus routes and 65 kilometres (40 mi) of tram routes. [ 1 ]",
  "Bassecourt ( French pronunciation: [baskuʁ] ) is a former municipality in the district of Delémont in the canton of Jura in Switzerland .    On 1 January 2013 the former municipalities of Bassecourt, Courfaivre , Glovelier , Soulce and Undervelier merged to form the new municipality of Haute-Sorne . [ 1 ]",
  "The Bauhaus Archive ( German : Bauhaus-Archiv ) is a state archive and Museum of Design located in Berlin . It collects art pieces, items, documents and literature which relate to the Bauhaus School (1919–1933), and puts them on public display. Currently, the museum is closed due to construction works and will reopen in 2022. It has a temporary space at Knesbeckstr. 1–2 in Berlin-Charlottenburg. [ 1 ]",
  "Bayrisch Kraut ( Bavarian cabbage ) [ 1 ] is a traditional Bavarian dish . It is made of shredded cabbage cooked in beef stock with pork lard, onion, apples, and seasoned with vinegar. It is typically served with bratwurst or roast pork. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In German cuisine it is an alternative to sauerkraut .",
  "The Biblioteca Ambrosiana is a historic library in Milan , Italy , also housing the Pinacoteca Ambrosiana , the Ambrosian art gallery. Named after Ambrose , the patron saint of Milan, it was founded in 1609 by Cardinal Federico Borromeo , whose agents scoured Western Europe and even Greece and Syria for books and manuscripts. Some major acquisitions of complete libraries were the manuscripts of the Benedictine monastery of Bobbio (1606) and the library of the Paduan Vincenzo Pinelli , whose more than 800 manuscripts filled 70 cases when they were sent to Milan and included the famous Iliad , the Ilias Picta .",
  "A bicycle , also called a pedal cycle , bike , push-bike or cycle , is a human-powered or motor-assisted , pedal-driven , single-track vehicle , with two wheels attached to a frame , one behind the other. A bicycle rider is called a cyclist, or bicyclist.",
  "Triploblasts Lankester, 1873 Bilateria ( / ˌ b aɪ l ə ˈ t ɪər i ə / ) [ 5 ] is a large clade of animals characterised by bilateral symmetry during embryonic development . This means their body plans are laid around a longitudinal axis with a front (or \"head\") and a rear (or \"tail\") end, as well as a left–right–symmetrical belly ( ventral ) and back ( dorsal ) surface. Nearly all bilaterians maintain a bilaterally symmetrical body as adults; the most notable exception is the echinoderms , which have pentaradial symmetry as adults, but  bilateral symmetry as embryos . With few exceptions, bilaterian embryos are triploblastic , having three germ layers : endoderm , mesoderm and ectoderm , and have complete digestive tracts with a separate mouth and anus . Some bilaterians lack body cavities , while others have a primary body cavity derived from the blastocoel ,  or a secondary cavity, the coelom . Cephalization is a characteristic feature among most bilaterians, where the sense organs and central nerve ganglia become concentrated at the front end of the animal.",
  "William Maher [ 1 ] ( / m ɑːr / MAR ; born January 20, 1956) [ 2 ] is an American comedian, writer, producer, political commentator, actor, and television host. He is popularly known for the HBO political talk show Real Time with Bill Maher (2003–present) and the similar late-night show called Politically Incorrect (1993–2002), originally on Comedy Central and later on ABC . In 2022, Maher started the podcast Club Random . [ 3 ]",
  "A bloc party ( German : Blockpartei ), sometimes called a satellite party , is a political party that is a constituent member of an electoral bloc . However, the term also has a more specific meaning, referring to non-ruling but legal political parties in a one-party state (most notably communist states as auxiliary parties and members of a ruling coalition, differing such governments from pure one-party states such as Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union ) although such minor parties rarely if ever constitute opposition parties or alternative sources of power. [ 1 ] Other authoritarian regimes may also have multiple political parties which are nominally independent in order to give the appearance of political pluralism, but support or act in de facto cooperation with the government or ruling party.",
  "Boho-chic is a style of fashion drawing on various bohemian and hippie influences, which, at its height in late 2005 was associated particularly with actress Sienna Miller , model Kate Moss in the United Kingdom and actress/businesswoman Mary-Kate Olsen in the United States. It has been seen since the early 1990s and, although appearing to wane from time to time, has repeatedly re-surfaced in varying guises. Many elements of boho-chic became popular in the late 1960s and some date back much further, being associated, for example, with pre-Raphaelite women of the mid-to-late 19th century.",
  "Boomerang is an American cable television network owned by The Cartoon Network, Inc. , a sub-division of the Warner Bros. Discovery Networks division of Warner Bros. Discovery . The network primarily broadcasts animated programming from the Warner Bros. Animation library, including Warner Bros. Cartoons and Hanna-Barbera productions among others.",
  "A bullfighter (or matador ) is a performer in the activity of bullfighting . Torero ( Spanish: [toˈɾeɾo] ) or toureiro ( Portuguese: [toˈɾɐjɾu] ), both from Latin taurarius , are the Spanish and Portuguese words for bullfighter, and describe all the performers in the activity of bullfighting as practised in Spain, Portugal, Mexico, Peru, France, Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuela and other countries influenced by Portuguese and Spanish culture . [ 1 ] The main performer and leader of the entourage in a bullfight, and who finally kills the bull, is addressed as maestro (master), or with the formal title matador de toros (killer of bulls). The other bullfighters in the entourage are called subalternos and their suits are embroidered in silver as opposed to the matador's gold. They include the picadores , rejoneadores , and banderilleros .",
  "Calico ( / ˈ k æ l ɪ k oʊ / ; in British usage since 1505) [ 1 ] is a heavy [ 2 ] plain-woven textile made from unbleached, and often not fully processed, cotton . It may also contain unseparated husk parts. The fabric is far coarser than muslin , but less coarse and thick than canvas or denim . However, it is still very cheap owing to its unfinished and undyed appearance.",
  "A caliphate ( Arabic : خِلَافَةْ , romanized : khilāfah [xi'laːfah] ) is an institution or public office under the leadership of an Islamic steward with the title of caliph [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] ( / ˈ k æ l ɪ f , ˈ k eɪ -/ ; خَلِيفَةْ khalīfa [xæ'liːfæh] , pronunciation ⓘ ), a person considered a political–religious successor to the Islamic prophet Muhammad and a leader of the entire Muslim world ( ummah ). [ 4 ] Historically, the caliphates were polities based on Islam which developed into multi-ethnic trans-national empires. [ 5 ] [ 6 ]",
  "A capital city , or just capital , is the municipality holding primary status in a country , state , province , department , or other subnational division , usually as its seat of the government . A capital is typically a city that physically encompasses the government's offices and meeting places; the status as capital is often designated by its law or constitution . In some jurisdictions , including several countries, different branches of government are in different settlements, sometimes meaning multiple official capitals. In some cases, a distinction is made between the official ( constitutional ) capital and the seat of government, which is in another place .",
  "In team sport , captain is a title given to a member of the team.  The title is frequently honorary, but in some cases the captain may have significant responsibility for strategy and teamwork while the game is in progress on the field.  In either case, it is a position that indicates honor and respect from one's teammates – recognition as a leader by one's peers. In association football and cricket , a captain is also known as a skipper . [ 1 ]",
  "The carbatina ( pl. carbatinae ) was a kind of shoe common among the rural poor of ancient Greece and Rome from remote antiquity to around the 3rd century, consisting of a piece of rawhide pulled around the foot and then tied down to hold it in place. Having no upper or separate sole , the carbatina is among the simplest forms of footwear in the world and is sometimes used as a general name for similar footwear in other cultures.",
  "Carl Edward Sagan ( / ˈ s eɪ ɡ ən / ; SAY -gən ; November 9, 1934 – December 20, 1996) was an American astronomer , planetary scientist and science communicator . His best known scientific contribution is his research on the possibility of extraterrestrial life , including experimental demonstration of the production of amino acids from basic chemicals by exposure to light. He assembled the first physical messages sent into space, the Pioneer plaque and the Voyager Golden Record , which were universal messages that could potentially be understood by any extraterrestrial intelligence that might find them. He argued in favor of the hypothesis, which has since been accepted, that the high surface temperatures of Venus are the result of the greenhouse effect . [ 4 ]",
  "Carnivorous plants are plants that derive some or most of their nutrients from trapping and consuming animals or protozoans , typically insects and other arthropods , and occasionally small mammals and birds . They still generate all of their energy from photosynthesis . They have adapted to grow in waterlogged sunny places where the soil is thin or poor in nutrients , especially nitrogen , such as acidic bogs . [ 4 ] They can be found on all continents except Antarctica , as well as many Pacific islands. [ 5 ] In 1875, Charles Darwin published Insectivorous Plants , the first treatise to recognize the significance of carnivory in plants, describing years of painstaking research. [ 6 ] [ 4 ]",
  "A cento is a poetical work wholly composed of verses or passages taken from other authors, especially the Greek poet Homer and the Roman poet Virgil , disposed in a new form or order. [ 1 ] The Latin term cento derives from Greek κέντρων ( kentrōn ), meaning \"'to plant slips' (of trees)\". A later word in Greek, κεντρόνη ( kentronē ), means \"patchwork garment\". According to Hugh Gerard Evelyn-White , \"A cento is therefore a poem composed of odd fragments\". [ 2 ]",
  "Schloss Charlottenburg ( Charlottenburg Palace ) is a Baroque palace in Berlin , located in Charlottenburg , a district of the Charlottenburg-Wilmersdorf borough, and is among the largest palaces in the world .",
  "The Château Borély is a chateau in the southern part of Marseille , France. [ 1 ] Associated with Borély park and Marseille Borély golf course, it has been listed as a historical monument since 1936, [ 2 ] and has housed the Museum of Decorative Arts, Earthenware and Fashion since Marseille-Provence 2013 [ 3 ] with its rich original decor.",
  "Chittagong Kings ( Bengali : চিটাগাং কিংস ) is a franchise cricket team which participates in the Bangladesh Premier League (BPL). [ 1 ] The franchise is based in Chattogram . The Chattogram franchise joined the BPL as one of its original members  in 2012, which was owned by SQ sports. After SQ Sports was charged with fixing and delaying payments to players, it was banned from participating in cricketing activities so were all the other franchisees owners for corruption scandals. It appeared in the final in 2013 under the captaincy of Mahmudullah Riyad and coaching of Khaled Mahmud . The team changed its name from Chittagong Kings after a change of ownership in 2015. And Chittagong Vikings was founded 1 December 2015. [ 2 ] It was owned by DBL Sports Limited, a concern of DBL Group . [ 3 ]",
  "The Choc Stars are a soukous band from the Democratic Republic of the Congo . The band was founded in 1983 by Ben Nyamabo , and has since published over 50 albums. The apex of their success was in the 1980s, when guitarist and vocalist Bozi Boziana wrote some of their most appreciated hits, such as Sandu Kotti , Alena , Mbuta-Mutu , and Retrouvailles a Paris . [ 1 ] When Boziana left to create his own ensemble, three singers were hired to replace him ( Carlito Lassa , Dieka Debaba e Defao Matumona ). Many other talented Congolese musicians have joined the Choc Stars over the years; some of them are Roxy Tshimpaka , Djuna Djanana , Monza Premier , Nzola Ndonga , Nzaya Nzayadio , Zemano Germain Kanza , Djo Mali , Carrol Makamba , Teddy Accompa , Wajery Lema , Ditutala Kuama and Djudjuchet . Most of these were coming from (or would later move to) other prominent soukous bands such as Zaiko Langa Langa , Langa Langa Stars , Orchestre Big Stars , OK Jazz , Zaïko Nkolo Mboka and others.",
  "The cinematographer or director of photography (sometimes shortened to DP or DOP ) is the person responsible for the recording of a film , television production, music video or other live-action piece. The cinematographer is the chief of the camera and light crews working on such projects. They would normally be responsible for making artistic and technical decisions related to the image and for selecting the camera, film stock , lenses , filters , etc. The study and practice of this field are referred to as cinematography .",
  "Plucked The clarinet is a single-reed musical instrument in the woodwind family, with a nearly cylindrical bore and a flared bell. Clarinets comprise a family of instruments of differing sizes and pitches. The clarinet family is the largest woodwind family, ranging from the BB♭ contrabass to the A♭ piccolo . The B ♭ soprano clarinet is the most common type, and is the instrument usually indicated by the word \"clarinet\".",
  "Classic Produktion Osnabrück (often referred to as cpo , in lowercase) is a record label founded in 1986 by Georg Ortmann and several others. [ 1 ] Its declared mission is to fill niches in the recorded classical repertory, with an emphasis on romantic, late romantic, and 20th-century music. [ 2 ] The label also aims to release complete cycles of recordings, such as complete sets of symphonies, concertos, chamber music, and so forth. It is the house label of online retailer jpc . [ 3 ]",
  "Club Deportivo Guadalajara, S.A.D. is a Spanish football club based in Guadalajara , in the autonomous community of Castilla–La Mancha . Founded in 1947 it currently plays in Segunda Federación – Group 5, holding home matches at Estadio Pedro Escartín , with a capacity for 6,000 seats.",
  "The Colorado Gold Kings , previously known as the Alaska Gold Kings , were an American professional minor league ice hockey team based in Fairbanks , Alaska , and later Colorado Springs , Colorado . The Gold Kings were members of the West Coast Hockey League .",
  "A comedian (feminine comedienne ) or comic is a person who seeks to entertain an audience by making them laugh . This might be through jokes or amusing situations, or acting foolishly (as in slapstick ), or employing prop comedy . A comedian who addresses an audience directly is called a stand-up comedian .",
  "The common sole , Dover sole , or black sole ( Solea solea ) is a species of flatfish in the family Soleidae . It is one of the largest fish in the Solea genus. It lives on the sandy or muddy seabed of the northern Atlantic and the Mediterranean Sea where it often partially immerses itself in the substrate . The upper side is greyish-brown while the underside is white. It grows to a maximum length of about 70 cm (28 in). The species is prized as a food fish, being caught mostly by Bottom trawling on the seabed.",
  "Former parties Former parties Former parties A communist party is a political party that seeks to realize the socio-economic goals of communism . The term \"communist party\" was popularized by the title of The Manifesto of the Communist Party (1848) by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels . As a vanguard party , the communist party guides the political education and development of the working class (proletariat). As a ruling party, the communist party exercises power through the dictatorship of the proletariat . Vladimir Lenin developed the idea of the communist party as the revolutionary vanguard, when the socialist movement in Imperial Russia was divided into ideologically opposed factions, the Bolshevik faction (\"of the majority\") and the Menshevik faction (\"of the minority\"). To be politically effective, Lenin proposed a small vanguard party managed with democratic centralism which allowed the centralized command of a disciplined cadre of professional revolutionaries . Once a policy was agreed upon, realizing political goals required every Bolshevik's total commitment to the agreed-upon policy.",
  "Community journalism is locally-oriented, professional news coverage that typically focuses on city neighborhoods, individual suburbs or small towns, rather than metropolitan, state, national or world news.",
  "A composer is a person who writes music . [ 1 ] The term is especially used to indicate composers of Western classical music , [ 2 ] or those who are composers by occupation. [ 3 ] Many composers are, or were, also skilled performers of music.",
  "Conducting is the art of directing a musical performance , such as an orchestral or choral concert . It has been defined as \"the art of directing the simultaneous performance of several players or singers by the use of gesture.\" [ 1 ] The primary duties of the conductor are to interpret the score in a way that reflects the specific indications in that score, set the tempo , ensure correct entries by ensemble members, and \"shape\" the phrasing where appropriate. [ 2 ] Conductors communicate with their musicians primarily through hand gestures, usually with the aid of a baton , and may use other gestures or signals such as facial expression and eye contact. [ 3 ] A conductor usually supplements their direction with verbal instructions to their musicians in rehearsal . [ 3 ]",
  "Courtship is the period wherein some couples get to know each other prior to a possible marriage or committed romantic, de facto relationship. Courtship traditionally may begin after a betrothal and may conclude with the celebration of marriage . [ 1 ] A courtship may be an informal and private matter between two people or may be a public affair, or a formal arrangement with family approval . Traditionally, in the case of a formal engagement, it is the role of a male to actively \"court\" or \"woo\" a female, thus encouraging her to understand him and her receptiveness to a marriage proposal .",
  "Crime comics is a genre of American comic books and format of crime fiction . The genre was originally popular in the late 1940s and early 1950s and is marked by a moralistic editorial tone and graphic depictions of violence and criminal activity. Crime comics began in 1942 with the publication of Crime Does Not Pay published by Lev Gleason Publications and edited by Charles Biro . As sales for superhero comic books declined in the years after World War II , other publishers began to emulate the popular format, content and subject matter of Crime Does Not Pay , leading to a deluge of crime-themed comics. Crime and horror comics , especially those published by EC Comics , came under official scrutiny in the late 1940s and early 1950s, leading to legislation in Canada and the United Kingdom , the creation in the United States of the Comics Magazine Association of America and the imposition of the Comics Code Authority in 1954. This code placed limits on the degree and kind of criminal activity that could be depicted in American comic books, effectively sounding the death knell for crime comics and their adult themes.",
  "A crozier or crosier (also known as a paterissa , pastoral staff , or bishop's staff ) [ 1 ] is a stylized staff that is a symbol of the governing office of a bishop or abbot and is carried by high-ranking prelates of Roman Catholic , Eastern Catholic , Eastern Orthodox , Oriental Orthodox , Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian Church , and some Anglican , Lutheran , United Methodist and Pentecostal churches.",
  "Crown moulding (interchangeably spelled Crown molding in American English) is a form of cornice created out of decorative moulding installed atop an interior wall.  It is also used atop doors, windows, pilasters and cabinets .",
  "Crunchyroll is an American subscription video on-demand over-the-top streaming service owned by Sony Group Corporation . [ b ] The service primarily distributes films and television series produced by East Asian media , including Japanese anime , and is headquartered in San Francisco, California , with a Japanese branch located in Shibuya , Tokyo .",
  "The Cuban Institute of Radio and Television ( Spanish : Instituto Cubano de Radio y Televisión ; ICRT ) was the government agency responsible for the control of radio and television broadcasters in Cuba . On August 24, 2021, the institute ceased to operate and was replaced by the Institute of Information and Social Communication. [ 1 ]",
  "Mosquitoes , the Culicidae , are a family of small flies consisting of 3,600 species . The word mosquito (formed by mosca and diminutive -ito ) [ 2 ] is Spanish and Portuguese for little fly . [ 3 ] Mosquitoes have a slender segmented body , one pair of wings, three pairs of long hair-like legs, and specialized, highly elongated, piercing-sucking mouthparts . All mosquitoes drink nectar from flowers ; females of some species have in addition adapted to drink blood. The group diversified during the Cretaceous period. Evolutionary biologists view mosquitoes as micropredators , small animals that parasitise larger ones by drinking their blood without immediately killing them. Medical parasitologists view mosquitoes instead as vectors of disease , carrying protozoan parasites or bacterial or viral pathogens from one host to another.",
  "The Cultural Revolution , formally known as the Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution , was a sociopolitical movement in the People's Republic of China (PRC). It was launched by Mao Zedong in 1966 and lasted until 1976. Its stated goal was to preserve Chinese socialism by purging remnants of capitalist and traditional elements from Chinese society .",
  "A curia is an official body that governs an entity within the Catholic Church . These curias range from the relatively simple diocesan curia; to the larger patriarchal curias; to the curia of various Catholic particular churches ; to the Roman Curia , which is the central government of the Catholic Church. Other Catholic bodies, such as religious institutes , may also have curias.",
  "D. Rajarathinam was an Indian politician and former Member of the Legislative Assembly of Tamil Nadu . He was elected to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly from Sriperumbudur Constituency as a Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam candidate in 1967 and 1971 elections . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] He was elected from Poonamallee Constituency as a Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam candidate in 1977 and 1980 elections . [ 3 ] [ 4 ]",
  "Dance is an art form , consisting of sequences of body movements with aesthetic and often symbolic value, either improvised or purposefully selected. Dance can be categorized and described by its choreography , by its repertoire of movements or by its historical period or place of origin . Dance is typically performed with musical accompaniment , and sometimes with the dancer simultaneously using a musical instrument themselves.",
  "Dario Luigi Angelo Fo ( Italian: [ˈdaːrjo ˈfɔ] ; 24 March 1926 – 13 October 2016) was an Italian playwright, actor, theatre director, stage designer , songwriter, political campaigner for the Italian left wing and the recipient of the 1997 Nobel Prize in Literature . [ 1 ] In his time he was \"arguably the most widely performed contemporary playwright in world theatre\". [ 2 ] Much of his dramatic work depends on improvisation and comprises the recovery of \"illegitimate\" forms of theatre, such as those performed by giullari (medieval strolling players) [ 3 ] and, more famously, the ancient Italian style of commedia dell'arte . [ 4 ]",
  "Dato' Sri Tahir , born Ang Tjoen Ming ( Chinese : 翁俊民 ; Pe̍h-ōe-jī : Ang Tsùn Bîn ; born 26 March 1952) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is an Indonesian billionaire, and a banking and property magnate. [ 3 ] He is the founder of the Mayapada Group . [ 4 ] On 13 December 2019, President Joko Widodo appointed Tahir to the Presidential Advisory Council.\nHe is married to the daughter of Indonesian billionaire Mochtar Riady . [ 5 ]",
  "The dhoti is an ankle -length breechcloth, [ 1 ] wrapped around the waist and the legs, in resemblance to the shape of trousers . [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The dhoti is a garment of ethnic wear for men in the Indian subcontinent . [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The dhoti is fashioned out of a rectangular piece of unstitched cloth, of usually around 4 yards (3.7 m) in length. [ 7 ] [ 8 ]",
  "Dinosaurs are a diverse group of reptiles [ note 1 ] of the clade Dinosauria . They first appeared during the Triassic period , between 243 and 233.23 million years ago (mya), although the exact origin and timing of the evolution of dinosaurs is a subject of active research. They became the dominant terrestrial vertebrates after the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event 201.3 mya and their dominance continued throughout the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods. The fossil record shows that birds are feathered dinosaurs , having evolved from earlier theropods during the Late Jurassic epoch , and are the only dinosaur lineage known to have survived the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event approximately 66 mya. Dinosaurs can therefore be divided into avian dinosaurs —birds—and the extinct non-avian dinosaurs , which are all dinosaurs other than birds.",
  "Dione Lucas (pronounced dee-OH-nee ; born Dione Wilson; 10 October 1909 – 18 December 1971) [ 1 ] was an English chef, [ 2 ] and the first female graduate of Le Cordon Bleu . Her father was the architect, jeweller and designer Henry Wilson , and her sister was the violinist Orrea Pernel (1906–1993). [ 3 ] She married another architect, Colin Lucas (1906–1984). [ 4 ]",
  "A disc jockey , more commonly abbreviated as DJ , is a person who plays recorded music for an audience. Types of DJs include radio DJs (who host programs on music radio stations), club DJs (who work at nightclubs or music festivals ), mobile DJs (who are hired to work at public and private events such as weddings, parties, or festivals), and turntablists (who use record players, usually turntables , to manipulate sounds on phonograph records ). Originally, the \"disc\" in \"disc jockey\" referred to shellac and later vinyl records , but nowadays DJ is used as an all-encompassing term to also describe persons who mix music from other recording media such as cassettes , CDs or digital audio files on a CDJ , controller, or even a laptop. DJs may adopt the title \"DJ\" in front of their real names, adopted pseudonyms, or stage names. [ 1 ]",
  "Divisions Sama vedic Yajur vedic Atharva vedic Vaishnava puranas Shaiva puranas Shakta puranas The Dnyaneshwari ( Marathi : ज्ञानेश्वरी ) ( IAST : Jñānēśvarī ), also referred to as Jnanesvari , Jnaneshwari or Bhavartha Deepika , is a commentary on the Bhagavad Gita written by the Marathi saint and poet Sant Dnyaneshwar in 1290 CE. [ 1 ] Dnyaneshwar (born 1275) lived a short life of 22 years, and this commentary is notable to have been composed in his teens. The text is the oldest surviving literary work in the Marathi language, one that inspired major Bhakti movement saint-poets such as Eknath and Tukaram of the Varkari ( Vithoba ) tradition. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Dnyaneshwari interprets the Bhagavad Gita in the Advaita Vedanta tradition of Hinduism. [ 5 ] The philosophical depth of the text has been praised for its aesthetic as well as scholarly value. [ 6 ]",
  "A drummer is a percussionist who creates music using drums . Most contemporary western bands that play rock , pop , jazz , or R&B music include a drummer for purposes including timekeeping and embellishing the musical timbre . The drummer's equipment includes a drum kit (or \"drum set\" or \"trap set\"), which includes various drums, cymbals and an assortment of accessory hardware such as pedals, standing support mechanisms, and drum sticks .",
  "Ebikon railway station ( German : Bahnhof Ebikon ) is a railway station in the municipality of Ebikon , in the Swiss canton of Lucerne . It is an intermediate stop on the standard gauge Zug–Lucerne line of Swiss Federal Railways .",
  "Egyptology (from Egypt and Greek -λογία , -logia ; Arabic : علم المصريات ) is the scientific study of ancient Egypt . The topics studied include ancient Egyptian history , language , literature , religion , architecture and art from the 5th millennium BC until the end of its native religious practices in the 4th century AD.",
  "Eid Mubarak ( Arabic : عِيد مُبَارَك , romanized : ʿīd mubārak ) is an Arabic phrase that means \"blessed feast or festival\". [ 1 ] The term is used by Muslims all over the world as a greeting to celebrate Eid al-Fitr (which marks the end of Ramadan ) and Eid al-Adha (which is in the month of Dhu al-Hijjah ). [ 2 ] [ 3 ] This exchange of greetings is a cultural tradition and not part of any religious obligation. [ 4 ] [ 5 ]",
  "Emmenbrücke Gersag railway station ( German : Bahnhof Emmenbrücke Gersag ) is a railway station in the municipality of Emmen , in the Swiss canton of Lucerne . It is located at the junction of the standard gauge Olten–Lucerne and Seetal lines of Swiss Federal Railways .",
  "Engastration is a cooking technique in which the remains of one animal are stuffed into another animal. The method supposedly originated during the Middle Ages . [ 1 ] Among the dishes made using the method is turducken , which involves placing chicken meat within a duck carcass within a turkey. [ 2 ] Some foods created using engastration have stuffing between each layer. [ 3 ] The carcasses are normally deboned before being placed together.",
  "Ethics is the philosophical study of moral phenomena. Also called moral philosophy , it investigates normative questions about what people ought to do or which behavior is morally right. Its main branches include normative ethics , applied ethics , and metaethics .",
  "An ethnographic film is a non-fiction film, often similar to a documentary film , historically shot by Western filmmakers and dealing with non-Western people, and sometimes associated with anthropology . Definitions of the term are not definitive. Some academics claim it is more documentary, less anthropology, while others think it rests somewhere between the fields of anthropology and documentary films. [ 1 ]",
  "Etiquette ( / ˈ ɛ t i k ɛ t , - k ɪ t / ) is the set of norms of personal behaviour in polite society, usually occurring in the form of an ethical code of the expected and accepted social behaviours that accord with the conventions and norms observed and practised by a society , a social class , or a social group . In modern English usage, the French word étiquette (label and tag) dates from the year 1750. [ 2 ]",
  "Eugène Ionesco ( / j ə ˈ n ɛ s k oʊ / ; [ 1 ] French: [øʒɛn jɔnɛsko] ; born Eugen Ionescu , Romanian: [e.uˈdʒen joˈnesku] ⓘ ; 26 November 1909 – 28 March 1994) was a Romanian-French playwright who wrote mostly in French, and was one of the foremost figures of the French avant-garde theatre in the 20th century. Ionesco instigated a revolution in ideas and techniques of drama, beginning with his \"anti play\", The Bald Soprano which contributed to the beginnings of what is known as the Theatre of the Absurd , which includes a number of plays that, following the ideas of the philosopher Albert Camus , explore concepts of absurdism and surrealism. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] He was made a member of the Académie française in 1970, and was awarded the 1970 Austrian State Prize for European Literature , and the 1973 Jerusalem Prize .",
  "European comics are comics produced in Europe . The comic album is a very common printed medium. The typical album is printed in large format, generally with high quality paper and colouring, commonly 24 cm × 32 cm (9.4 in × 12.6 in), has around 48–60 pages, but examples with more than 100 pages are common. While sometimes referred to as graphic novels , this term is rarely used in Europe, and is not always applicable as albums often consist of separate short stories, placing them somewhere halfway between a comic book and a graphic novel. The European comic genres vary from the humorous adventure vein, such as The Adventures of Tintin and Asterix , [ 1 ] to more adult subjects like Tex Willer , Diabolik , and Thorgal .",
  "A European political party , formerly known as a political party at European level [ note 1 ] and informally as a Europarty , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a type of European political alliance recognised as a political party operating transnationally in Europe and within the institutions of the European Union (EU). They are regulated and funded by EU Regulation 1141/2014 on the statute and funding of European political parties and European political foundations, and their operations are supervised by the Authority for European Political Parties and European Political Foundations (APPF).",
  "Existentialism is a family of philosophical views and inquiry that explore the human individual's struggle to lead an authentic life despite the apparent absurdity or incomprehensibility of existence . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In examining meaning , purpose, and value , existentialist thought often includes concepts such as existential crises , angst , courage , and freedom . [ 4 ]",
  "A background actor or extra is a performer in a film , television show , stage, musical, opera, or ballet production who appears in a nonspeaking or nonsinging (silent) capacity, usually in the background (for example, in an audience or busy street scene). War films and epic films often employ background actors in large numbers: some films have featured hundreds or even thousands of paid background actors as cast members (hence the term \"cast of thousands\"). Likewise, grand opera can involve many background actors appearing in spectacular productions. [ citation needed ]",
  "Fable is a literary genre defined as a succinct fictional story, in prose or verse , that features animals , legendary creatures , plants , inanimate objects, or forces of nature that are anthropomorphized , and that illustrates or leads to a particular moral lesson (a \"moral\"), which may at the end be added explicitly as a concise maxim or saying .",
  "A fairy tale (alternative names include fairytale , fairy story , household tale , [ 1 ] magic tale , or wonder tale ) is a short story that belongs to the folklore genre . [ 2 ] Such stories typically feature magic , enchantments , and mythical or fanciful beings. In most cultures, there is no clear line separating myth from folk or fairy tale; all these together form the literature of preliterate societies. [ 3 ] Fairy tales may be distinguished from other folk narratives such as legends (which generally involve belief in the veracity of the events described) [ 4 ] and explicit moral tales, including beast fables . Prevalent elements include dragons , dwarfs , elves , fairies , giants , gnomes , goblins , griffins , merfolk , monsters , monarchy , pixies , talking animals , trolls , unicorns , witches , wizards , magic, and enchantments.",
  "Flamenco ( Spanish pronunciation: [flaˈmeŋko] ) is an art form based on the various folkloric music traditions of southern Spain , developed within the gitano subculture of the region of Andalusia , and also having historical presence in Extremadura and Murcia . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In a wider sense, the term is used to refer to a variety of both contemporary and traditional musical styles typical of southern Spain. Flamenco is closely associated  to the gitanos of the Romani ethnicity who have contributed significantly to its origination and professionalization . However, its style is uniquely Andalusian and flamenco artists have historically included Spaniards of both gitano and non-gitano heritage. [ 4 ]",
  "A flat white is a coffee drink consisting of espresso and steamed milk. It generally has a higher proportion of espresso to milk than a caffè latte , and lacks the thick layer of foam in a cappuccino . While the origin of the flat white is unclear, café owners in both Australia and New Zealand claim its invention.",
  "Folklore is the body of expressive culture shared by a particular group of people , culture or subculture . [ 1 ] This includes oral traditions such as tales , myths , legends , proverbs , poems , jokes , and other oral traditions. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] This also includes material culture , such as traditional building styles common to the group. Folklore also encompasses customary lore, taking actions for folk beliefs, including folk religion , and the forms and rituals of celebrations such as Christmas , weddings, folk dances , and initiation rites . [ 2 ]",
  "Formula One ( F1 ) is the highest class of international racing for open-wheel single-seater formula racing cars sanctioned by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA). The FIA Formula One World Championship has been one of the world's premier forms of motorsport since its inaugural running in 1950 and is often considered to be the pinnacle of motorsport. The word formula in the name refers to the set of rules all participant cars must follow. A Formula One season consists of a series of races, known as Grands Prix . Grands Prix take place in multiple countries and continents on either purpose-built circuits or closed roads.",
  "Francis Coventry ( / ˈ k ɒ v ən t r i / ; 1725–1759) was an English Anglican cleric and novelist, best known for The History of Pompey the Little . A native of Cambridgeshire , he was educated at Magdalene College, Cambridge , where he proceeded B.A. 1748 and M.A. 1752. [ 1 ] He was appointed by his kinsman the Earl of Coventry to the perpetual curacy of Edgware , and died of smallpox at Whitchurch . [ 2 ] [ 3 ]",
  "Franz Ziehl (13 April 1857 in Wismar – 7 April 1926) was a German bacteriologist . He was a professor in Lübeck . Franz Ziehl introduced the carbol fuchsin stain for the tubercle bacillus in 1882. With pathologist Friedrich Neelsen (1854–1898), he developed the Ziehl–Neelsen stain , [ 1 ] also known as the acid-fast stain, which is used to identify acid-fast bacteria .",
  "The French Revolution ( French : Révolution française [ʁevɔlysjɔ̃ fʁɑ̃sɛːz] ) was a period of political and societal change in France which began with the Estates General of 1789 and ended with the Coup of 18 Brumaire on 9 November 1799. Many of the revolution's ideas are considered fundamental principles of liberal democracy , [ 1 ] and its values remain central to modern French political discourse. [ 2 ]",
  "A fungus ( pl. : fungi [ 3 ] or funguses [ 4 ] ) is any member of the group of eukaryotic organisms that includes microorganisms such as yeasts and molds , as well as the more familiar mushrooms . These organisms are classified as one of the traditional eukaryotic kingdoms , along with Animalia , Plantae , and either Protista [ 5 ] or Protozoa and Chromista . [ 6 ]",
  "Funimation [ b ] was an American subscription video on-demand over-the-top streaming service. Launched in 2016, the service was one of the leading distributors of anime and other foreign entertainment properties in North America . It streamed popular series, such as Dragon Ball , One Piece , Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba , YuYu Hakusho , My Hero Academia , Attack on Titan , Fairy Tail , Black Clover , Fruits Basket , Assassination Classroom and Tokyo Ghoul among many others. [ 1 ] The service and its parent company were acquired by Sony , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] who ran the service through Sony Pictures Entertainment from 2017 to 2019 and then through SPE and Sony Music Entertainment Japan 's Aniplex from 2019 to its closure in 2024. In 2021, Sony acquired Crunchyroll . [ 4 ]",
  "Gauze is a thin, translucent fabric with a loose open weave .  In technical terms, \"gauze\" is a weave structure in which the weft yarns are arranged in pairs and are crossed before and after each warp yarn, keeping the weft firmly in place. [ 1 ] This weave structure is used to add stability to the fabric, which is important when using fine yarns loosely spaced. However, this weave structure can be used with any weight of yarn, and can be seen in some rustic textiles made from coarse hand-spun plant fiber yarns. Gauze is widely used for medical dressings.",
  "The Geneva Open Challenger , also known as IPP Trophy was a tennis tournament held in Geneva , Switzerland from 1988 to 2014. The event is part of the ATP Challenger Tour . Previously played on outdoor clay courts , it has been played indoors on hard GreenSet courts since 2011, at Sport Center of the Queue d'Arve. Originally, it was held at the Drizia-Miremont Tennis Club. Two-time Swiss champion Stanislas Wawrinka would later enter the world top 10 in the ATP rankings in 2008.",
  "Geoponici (the Latinized form of a nonexistent Γεωπονικοί, used for convenience), or Scriptores rei rusticae , is a collective term for the Greek and Latin writers on husbandry and agriculture . In classical times this topic was regarded as a branch of economics .",
  "Eric Arthur Blair (25 June 1903 – 21 January 1950) was an English novelist, poet, essayist, journalist, and critic who wrote under the pen name of George Orwell . His work is characterised by lucid prose , social criticism , opposition to all totalitarianism (both authoritarian communism and fascism ), and support of democratic socialism . [ 2 ] [ 3 ]",
  "The Glasgow School was a circle of influential artists and designers that began to coalesce in Glasgow , Scotland in the 1870s, and flourished from the 1890s to around 1910. Representative groups included The Four (also known as the Spook School ), the Glasgow Girls [ 1 ] and the Glasgow Boys . [ 2 ] Part of the international Art Nouveau movement, they were responsible for creating the distinctive Glasgow Style (see Modern Style (British Art Nouveau style) ).",
  "In many team sports that involve scoring goals , the goalkeeper (sometimes termed goaltender , netminder , GK , goalie , or keeper ) is a designated player charged with directly preventing the opposing team from scoring by blocking or intercepting opposing shots on goal. Such positions exist in bandy , rink bandy , camogie , association football , Gaelic football , international rules football , floorball , handball , hurling , field hockey , ice hockey , roller hockey , lacrosse , ringette , rinkball , water polo , and shinty , as well as in other sports.",
  "Golf equipment encompasses the various items that are used to play the sport of golf .  Types of equipment include the golf ball , golf clubs, and devices that aid in the sport. Originally, golf balls were made of a hardwood, such as beech. Beginning between the 14th and 16th centuries, more expensive golf balls were made of a leather skin stuffed with down feathers; these were called \"featheries\". Around the mid-1800s, a new material called gutta-percha, made from the latex of the East Asian sapodilla tree, started to be used to create more inexpensive golf balls nicknamed \"gutties\", which had similar flight characteristics as featheries. These then progressed to \"brambles\" in the later 1800s, using a raised dimple pattern and resembling bramble fruit, and then to \"meshies\" beginning in the early 1900s, where ball manufacturers started experimenting with latex rubber cores and wound mesh skins that created recessed patterns over the ball's surface. Recessed circular dimples were patented in 1910, but didn't become popular until the 1940s after the patents expired. [ 1 ]",
  "A graphic designer is a practitioner who follows the discipline of graphic design , either within companies or organizations or independently. They are professionals in design and visual communication , with their primary focus on transforming linguistic messages into graphic manifestations, whether tangible or intangible. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] They are responsible for planning, designing, projecting, and conveying messages or ideas through visual communication. [ 3 ] Graphic design is one of the most in-demand professions with significant job opportunities, as it allows leveraging technological advancements and working online from anywhere in the world. [ 4 ]",
  "Greeting is an act of communication in which human beings intentionally make their presence known to each other, to show attention to, and to suggest a type of relationship (usually cordial) or social status (formal or informal) between individuals or groups of people coming in contact with each other. Greetings are sometimes used just prior to a conversation or to greet in passing, such as on a sidewalk or trail. While greeting customs are highly culture - and situation-specific and may change within a culture depending on social status and relationship, they exist in all known human cultures. Greetings can be expressed both audibly and physically, and often involve a combination of the two. This topic excludes military and ceremonial salutes but includes rituals other than gestures . A greeting, or salutation , can also be expressed in written communications, such as letters and emails.",
  "A hamburger , or simply a burger , is a dish consisting of fillings—usually a patty of ground meat, typically beef —placed inside a sliced bun or bread roll . The patties are often served with cheese, lettuce, tomato, onion, pickles, bacon, or chilis with condiments such as ketchup, mustard, mayonnaise, relish or a \"special sauce\", often a variation of Thousand Island dressing , and are frequently placed on sesame seed buns . A hamburger patty topped with cheese is called a cheeseburger . [ 1 ] Under some definitions, and in some cultures, a burger is considered a sandwich .",
  "Heimatschutz Architecture , or the Heimatschutzstil (\"Homeland Preservation Style\") or Heimatstil (the latter term is not to be confused with Heimatstil in the sense of late historicism) is a style of architectural modernism that was first described in 1904 and had its prime until 1945. Various buildings were built after the war until around 1960. The main areas of work were settlement building, house building, garden design, industrial building, church building and monument preservation.",
  "Hessischer Rundfunk ( pronounced [ˈhɛsɪʃɐ ˈʁʊntfʊŋk] ; \"Hesse Broadcasting\"), shortened to HR ( pronounced [haːˈʔɛʁ] ; stylized as hr ),  is the German state of Hesse 's public broadcasting corporation . Headquartered in Frankfurt , it is a member of the national consortium of German public broadcasting corporations, ARD .",
  "In Judaism , the High Priest of Israel ( Hebrew : כֹּהֵן גָּדוֹל , romanized : Kohen Gadol , lit. 'great priest'; Aramaic : Kahana Rabba ) [ 1 ] was the head of the Israelite priesthood . He played a unique role in the worship conducted in the Tabernacle and later in the Temple in Jerusalem , as well as in some non-ritual matters. Like all priests, he was required to be descended from Aaron (the first biblical priest). But unlike other priests, the high priest followed more restrictive laws, wore unique priestly garments, and was the only priest allowed to perform certain ceremonies.",
  "King Charles III William, Prince of Wales Charles III ( King-in-Council ) Starmer ministry ( L ) Keir Starmer ( L ) Angela Rayner ( L ) ( King-in-Parliament ) Charles III The Lord Reed The Lord Hodge Andrew Bailey",
  "Horst P. Horst (born Horst Paul Albert Bormann ; August 14, 1906 \n– November 18, 1999) was a German-American fashion photographer . [ 1 ] The younger of the sons, Horst was born in Weissenfels-an-der-Saale , Germany, to Klara (Schönbrodt) and Max Bohrmann. His father was a successful merchant. In his teens, he met dancer Evan Weidemann at the home of his aunt, and this aroused his interest in avant-garde art. In the late 1920s, Horst studied at Hamburg Kunstgewerbeschule , leaving there in 1930 to go to Paris [ 2 ] to study under the architect Le Corbusier . [ citation needed ]",
  "The Hyundai Motor Group ( HMG ; IPA: [ˈhjəːndɛ] ; [ 2 ] stylized as HYUNDAI ) is a South Korean chaebol (loosely similar to a multinational conglomerate but without a central holding company or ownership structure) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] headquartered in Seoul , South Korea.",
  "Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church:",
  "Image Engine (also known as Image Engine Design Inc. ) is a visual effects studio based in Vancouver, BC, that offers a range of services for feature films and television, from concept designs and pre-visualization to CG animation, compositing, and explosive volumetric digital effects.",
  "An independent city or independent town is a city or town that does not form part of another general-purpose local government entity (such as a province). In the Holy Roman Empire , and to a degree in its successor states the German Confederation and the German Empire , so-called \" free imperial cities \" (nominative singular freie Reichsstadt , nominative plural freie Reichsstädte ) held the legal status of imperial immediacy , according to which they were not subinfeudated to any vassal ruler and were instead subject to the authority of the Emperor alone. Examples included Hamburg , Bremen , and Lübeck , along with others that gained and/or lost the privileges of immediacy over the course of the Empire's history.",
  "RE/Search No. 6/7: Industrial Culture Handbook from RE/Search Publications , 1983 is a book about industrial music and performance art edited by V. Vale and Andrea Juno.  It features interviews and articles with Throbbing Gristle , Mark Pauline , Cabaret Voltaire , NON , Monte Cazazza , Sordide Sentimental , SPK , Z'EV , Johanna Went and Rhythm & Noise . The book was re-released in 2006 in a new hardback edition.",
  "An intellectual is a person who engages in critical thinking , research , and reflection about the nature of reality , especially the nature of society and proposed solutions for its normative problems. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Coming from the world of culture , either as a creator or as a mediator, the intellectual participates in politics, either to defend a concrete proposition or to denounce an injustice, usually by either rejecting, producing or extending an ideology , and by defending a system of values . [ 3 ]",
  "The Intercontinental Champions' Supercup , commonly referred to as the Intercontinental Supercup or Recopa Intercontinental , was a football competition endorsed by UEFA and CONMEBOL , contested by the past winners of the Intercontinental Cup . The first Intercontinental Cup had been contested in 1960 , resulting in a pool of 5 past champions (two from UEFA, three from CONMEBOL) available to contest for the first Intercontinental Supercup, in 1968 . [ 1 ] The pool increased to 6 past champions for the 1969 Intercontinental Supercup, but the two past champions from UEFA chose not to participate, resulting in the winner of the CONMEBOL preliminary round being declared the Supercup winner. No further competitions were contested thereafter.",
  "Irish poetry is poetry written by poets from Ireland , politically the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland today. It is mainly written in Irish , though some is in English , Scottish Gaelic and others in Hiberno-Latin . The complex interplay between the two main traditions, and between both of them and other poetries in English and Scottish Gaelic , has produced a body of work that is both rich in variety and difficult to categorise. [ citation needed ]",
  "Jenna Marie Massoli (born April 9, 1974), [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] known professionally as Jenna Jameson ( / ˈ dʒ eɪ m ɪ s ən / ), is an American businesswoman, writer, television personality, and former pornographic film actress. [ 4 ] She has been named the world's most famous adult entertainment performer [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] and \"The Queen of Porn\". [ 8 ]",
  "Jewellery (or jewelry in American English ) consists of decorative items worn for personal adornment such as brooches , rings , necklaces , earrings , pendants , bracelets , and cufflinks . Jewellery may be attached to the body or the clothes. From a western perspective, the term is restricted to durable ornaments , excluding flowers for example. For many centuries metal such as gold often combined with gemstones , has been the normal material for jewellery, but other materials such as glass, shells and other plant materials may be used.",
  "A jockstrap , also a jock (male), jill (female), strap , cup , groin guard , pelvic protector (female), supporter , or athletic supporter , is an undergarment for protecting the scrotum and penis or vulva during contact sports or other vigorous physical activity. This article deals chiefly with the genital protective sports gear designed for the male body, colloquially known as a \"jock\".",
  "Joseph Kubert ( / ˈ k juː b ər t / ; [ 2 ] September 18, 1926 – August 12, 2012) was a Polish -born American comic book artist , art teacher, and founder of The Kubert School . He is best known for his work on the DC Comics characters Sgt. Rock and Hawkman . He is also known for working on his own creations, such as Tor , Son of Sinbad, and the Viking Prince , and, with writer Robin Moore , the comic strip Tales of the Green Beret .",
  "Jugendstil ( German pronunciation: [ˈjuːɡn̩tˌstiːl] ⓘ ; \"Youth Style\") was an artistic movement, particularly in the decorative arts , that was influential primarily in Germany, Austria and elsewhere in Europe to a lesser extent from about 1895 until about 1910. [ 1 ] It was the German and Austrian counterpart of Art Nouveau . The members of the movement were reacting against the historicism and neo-classicism of the official art and architecture academies. It took its name from the art journal Jugend , founded by the German artist Georg Hirth . It was especially active in the graphic arts and interior decoration. [ 2 ]",
  "Karl Landsteiner ForMemRS [ 2 ] ( German: [kaʁl ˈlantˌʃtaɪnɐ] ; 14 June 1868 – 26 June 1943 [ 3 ] ) was an Austrian-American biologist , physician, and immunologist . [ 4 ] He emigrated with his family to New York in 1923 at the age of 55 for professional opportunities, working for the Rockefeller Institute.",
  "Keanu Charles Reeves ( / k i ˈ ɑː n uː / kee- AH -noo ; [ 7 ] born September 2, 1964) is a Canadian [ c ] actor and musician. The recipient of numerous accolades in a career on screen spanning four decades, he is known for his leading roles in action films , his amiable public image, and his philanthropic efforts. In 2020, The New York Times ranked him as the fourth-greatest actor of the 21st century, and in 2022 Time magazine named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world .",
  "In the Muslim world , the marabout ( Arabic : مُرابِط , romanized : murābiṭ , lit. 'one who is attached/garrisoned') is a descendant of Muhammad [ 1 ] (Arabic: سـيّد, romanized : sayyid and sidi in the Maghreb ) and a Muslim religious leader and teacher who historically had the function of a chaplain serving as a part of an Islamic army , notably in North Africa and the Sahara region, [ 2 ] in West Africa , and historically in the Maghreb .",
  "Kinpira ( 金平 ) is a Japanese side dish , usually made of root vegetables that have been sautéed and simmered. [ 1 ] The most common variety is kinpira gobō , or braised burdock root . [ 2 ] Other vegetables used include carrots , lotus root ; [ 1 ] [ 2 ] skins of squash such as kabocha , mushrooms or broccoli ; [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and seaweeds such as arame and hijiki . [ 4 ] Other foods including tofu , capsicums , wheat gluten ( namafu ); chicken thigh , pork , and beef . [ 5 ] [ 6 ]",
  "A Kitty Foyle is a dress style of the  1940s, characterized by a dark fabric and contrasting light collar and cuffs , typically of navy blue and white. [ 1 ] The shape of the dress is a shirtwaist with short or elbow-length sleeves.",
  "KREEP , an acronym built from the letters K (the atomic symbol for potassium ), REE ( rare-earth elements ) and P (for phosphorus ), is a geochemical component of some lunar impact breccia and basaltic rocks. Its most significant feature is somewhat enhanced concentration of a majority of so-called \"incompatible\" elements [ 1 ] (those that are concentrated in the liquid phase during magma crystallization ) and the heat -producing elements, namely radioactive uranium , thorium , and potassium (due to presence of the radioactive 40 K ). [ 2 ]",
  "Kyobo Book Centre ( Korean : 교보문고 ; Hanja : 敎保文庫 ; RR : Gyobomungo , also known as Kyobo Mungo ) is the largest bookstore chain in South Korea . It has ten stores in seven cities, with the flagship Main Store, or Gwanghwamun-jeom in Seoul , which is located in the basement of the Kyobo Building, at 1 Jong-ro , Jongno-gu in Seoul's central business district. [ 1 ]",
  "Ladyfingers or Naples biscuits , [ 1 ] in British English sponge fingers , also known by the Italian name savoiardi ( Italian: [savoˈjardi] ) or by the French name boudoirs ( French: [budwaʁ] ), are low-density, dry, egg-based, sweet sponge cake biscuits roughly shaped like large fingers. [ 2 ] They are a principal ingredient in many dessert recipes, such as trifles and charlottes , and are also used as fruit or chocolate gateau linings, and for the sponge element of tiramisu . [ 3 ] They are typically soaked in a sugar syrup or liqueur , or in espresso for tiramisu. [ 4 ]",
  "A lectionary ( Latin : lectionarium ) is a book or listing that contains a collection of scripture readings appointed for Christian or Jewish worship on a given day or occasion.  There are sub-types such as a \"gospel lectionary\" or evangeliary , and an epistolary with the readings from the New Testament Epistles .",
  "The Leonard Law is a California law passed in 1992 and amended in 2006 that applies the First Amendment of the United States Constitution to private and public colleges , high schools, and universities . The law also applies Article I, Section 2 of the California Constitution to colleges and universities. California is the only state to grant First Amendment protections to students at private postsecondary institutions. Attempts at a federal Leonard Law and for Leonard Laws in other states have not succeeded.",
  "Les Trois Accords is a Canadian rock band from Drummondville , Québec . The band released their first album, Gros Mammouth Album , in 2003. In 2004, Gros Mammouth Album Turbo (certified Platinum by the Music Canada [ 1 ] ) was released with two extra tracks, \"Loin d'ici\" and \"Turbo Sympathique\". [ 2 ] In 2006, they released their second album, entitled Grand champion international de course (certified Gold by the Music Canada). [ 2 ]",
  "A Commentary on the Sixth Edition UNIX Operating System by John Lions (later reissued as Lions' Commentary on UNIX 6th Edition [ 1 ] [ 2 ] and commonly referred to as the Lions Book ) is a highly influential [ 3 ] 1976 publication containing analytical commentary on the source code of the 6th Edition Unix computer operating system \"resident nucleus\" [ 4 ] (i.e., kernel ) software , plus copy formatted and indexed by Lions, of said source code obtained from the authors at AT&T Bell Labs .",
  "Loco Locass is a Canadian hip hop group from Quebec formed in 1995. [ 1 ] The group often defends the role of the French language , and champions Quebec sovereignty . Songs such as \" ROC Rap\" and \"Résistance\" highlight the band's political leanings, and their strong advocacy for Quebec to be an independent country. Their song \"Le But\" was previously used as the goal song of the Montreal Canadiens and was played after every goal the Canadiens scored at the Bell Centre until the start of the 2017–18 NHL Season . \"Le But\" was recently brought back as the Canadiens' victory song.",
  "The logographers (from the Ancient Greek λογογράφος logográphos , a compound of λόγος lógos , here meaning \"story\" or \"prose\", and γράφω gráphō , \"write\") were the Greek historiographers and chroniclers before Herodotus , \"the father of history\". [ 1 ] Herodotus himself called his predecessors λογοποιοί ( logopoioí , from ποιέω poiéō , \"to make\").",
  "London [ c ] is the capital and largest city [ d ] of both England and the United Kingdom , with a population of 8,866,180 in 2022. [ 2 ] Its wider metropolitan area is the largest in Western Europe , with a population of 14.9 million. [ 7 ] London stands on the River Thames in southeast England, at the head of a 50-mile (80 km) tidal estuary down to the North Sea , and has been a major settlement for nearly 2,000 years. [ 8 ] Its ancient core and financial centre , the City of London , was founded by the Romans as Londinium and has retained its medieval boundaries. [ e ] [ 9 ] The City of Westminster , to the west of the City of London, has been the centuries-long host of the national government and parliament . London grew rapidly in the 19th century , becoming the world's largest city at the time . Since the 19th century, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] the name \"London\" has referred to the metropolis around the City of London, historically split between the counties of Middlesex , Essex , Surrey , Kent , and Hertfordshire , [ 12 ] which since 1965 has largely comprised the administrative area of Greater London , governed by 33 local authorities and the Greater London Authority . [ f ] [ 13 ]",
  "Modern lyric poetry is a formal type of poetry which expresses personal emotions or feelings, typically spoken in the first person. [ 1 ] The term for both modern lyric poetry and modern song lyrics derives from a form of Ancient Greek literature , the Greek lyric , which was defined by its musical accompaniment, usually on an instrument known as a kithara , a seven-stringed lyre (hence \"lyric\"). These three are not equivalent, though song lyrics are often in the lyric mode and Ancient Greek lyric poetry was principally chanted verse. [ a ] [ 2 ]",
  "Others In terms of Ihsan : The Maliki school [ a ] or Malikism is one of the four major schools of Islamic jurisprudence within Sunni Islam . [ 1 ] It was founded by Malik ibn Anas ( c. 711–795 CE ) in the 8th century. The Maliki school of jurisprudence relies on the Quran and Sunnah as primary sources. Unlike other Islamic fiqhs, Maliki fiqh also considers the consensus of the people of Medina to be a valid source of Islamic law . [ 2 ] [ 3 ]",
  "Manga ( Japanese : 漫画 , IPA: [maŋga] ⓘ [ a ] ) are comics or graphic novels originating from Japan . [ 1 ] Most manga conform to a style developed in Japan in the late 19th century, [ 2 ] and the form has a long history in earlier Japanese art . [ 3 ] The term manga is used in Japan to refer to both comics and cartooning . Outside of Japan, the word is typically used to refer to comics originally published in Japan.",
  "Manichaeism ( / ˌ m æ n ɪ ˈ k iː ɪ z əm / ; [ 4 ] in Persian : آئین مانی Āʾīn-ī Mānī ; Chinese : 摩尼教 ; pinyin : Móníjiào ) is a former major world religion , [ 5 ] founded in the 3rd century CE by the Parthian [ 6 ] prophet Mani (216–274 CE), in the Sasanian Empire . [ 7 ]",
  "A miniature (from the Latin verb miniare 'to colour with minium ', a red lead [ 1 ] ) is a small illustration used to decorate an ancient or medieval illuminated manuscript ; the simple illustrations of the early codices having been miniated or delineated with that pigment . The generally small scale of such medieval pictures has led to etymological confusion with minuteness and to its application to small paintings, especially portrait miniatures , [ 2 ] which did however grow from the same tradition and at least initially used similar techniques.",
  "Marit Eli Paulsen ( née Bjørnerud ; 24 November 1939 – 25 July 2022) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] was a Norwegian-born Swedish journalist, author and politician for the Liberals . She was a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) from 1999 to 2004 and from 2009 to 2015. She was a well-known figure in the Swedish public debate on environmental and food quality issues, initially as a non-partisan, and was an avid proponent of Swedish membership in the European Union during the EU membership referendum campaign in 1994 .",
  "Martial arts are codified systems and traditions of combat practiced for a number of reasons such as self-defence ; military and law enforcement applications; competition ;  physical, mental, and spiritual development; entertainment ; and the preservation of a nation's intangible cultural heritage . [ 1 ] The concept of martial arts was originally associated with East Asian tradition, [ 2 ] but subsequently the term has been applied to practices that originated outside that region.",
  "A master builder or master mason is a central figure leading construction projects in pre-modern times (a combination of a modern expert carpenter, construction site supervisor, and architect / engineer ).",
  "A mausoleum is an external free-standing building constructed as a monument enclosing the burial chamber of a deceased person or people. A mausoleum without the person's remains is called a cenotaph . A mausoleum may be considered a type of tomb , or the tomb may be considered to be within the mausoleum.",
  "The Mausoleum of Saladin holds the resting place and grave of the medieval Muslim Ayyubid Sultan Saladin . It is adjacent to the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus , Syria . [ 1 ] It was built in 1196, three years after the death of Saladin. [ 2 ] In addition to the tomb, the tomb complex included Madrassah al-Aziziah, of which little remains, except a few columns and an internal arch adjacent to the renovated tomb. [ 3 ]",
  "A maypole is a tall wooden pole erected as a part of various European folk festivals , around which a maypole dance often takes place. The festivals may occur on 1 May or Pentecost ( Whitsun ), although in some countries it is instead erected during Midsummer (20–26 June). In some cases, the maypole is a permanent feature that is only utilized during the festival, although in other cases it is erected specifically for the purpose before being taken down again.",
  "Mega-Lada Togliatti is a Russian motorcycle speedway team based in Tolyatti and who race in the Russian Speedway Championship . [ 1 ] The Anatoly Stepanov Stadium , formerly the Stroitel Stadium is located at Ulitsa Rodiny, 40 in Tolyatti . Its capacity is 15,000 seats and has a  track circumference of 353 metres. [ 2 ]",
  "The Melbourne shuffle is a rave dance that developed in Melbourne , Australia, in the late 1980s and early 1990s. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] The dance moves involve a fast heel-and-toe movement or T-step, combined with a variation of the running man coupled with a matching arm action. [ 1 ] The dance is improvised and involves \"repeatedly shuffling your feet inwards, then outwards, while thrusting your arms up and down, or side to side, in time with the beat\". Other moves can be incorporated including 360-degree spins and jumps and slides. [ 2 ]",
  "The Mennonites in Bolivia are among the most traditional and conservative of all Mennonite denominations in Latin America. They are mostly Russian Mennonites of Frisian , Flemish , and Prussian descent. As of 2013 [update] , there were about 70,000 Mennonites living in Bolivia ; [ 2 ] that population has grown to around 150,000 as of 2023. [ 1 ]",
  "Mary Louise \" Meryl \" Streep (born June 22, 1949) is an American actress. Known for her versatility and adept accent work, she has been described as \"the best actress of her generation\". [ 1 ] [ 2 ] She has received numerous accolades throughout her career spanning over five decades, including three Academy Awards , [ a ] [ 3 ] two British Academy Film Awards , [ b ] eight Golden Globe Awards , [ c ] [ 4 ] four Emmy Awards , and two Screen Actors Guild Awards , in addition to nominations for seven Grammy Awards and a Tony Award .",
  "A mesocosm ( meso- or 'medium' and -cosm 'world') is any outdoor experimental system that examines the natural environment under controlled conditions. In this way mesocosm studies provide a link between field surveys and highly controlled laboratory experiments. [ 1 ]",
  "Metro İstanbul is a public rail transport operator headquartered in Istanbul, Turkey. [ 1 ] Established in 1988, the company is responsible for operating most of Istanbul's rail systems, including the Istanbul Metro , Istanbul Tram , funiculars and aerial tramways .",
  "Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni [ a ] (6 March 1475 – 18 February 1564), known mononymously as Michelangelo , [ b ] [ 1 ] was an Italian sculptor, painter, architect, [ 2 ] and poet of the High Renaissance . Born in the Republic of Florence , his work was inspired by models from classical antiquity and had a lasting influence on Western art . Michelangelo's creative abilities and mastery in a range of artistic arenas define him as an archetypal Renaissance man , along with his rival and elder contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci . [ 3 ] Given the sheer volume of surviving correspondence, sketches, and reminiscences, Michelangelo is one of the best-documented artists of the 16th century. He was lauded by contemporary biographers as the most accomplished artist of his era. [ 4 ] [ 5 ]",
  "Michele Jolin is an American social entrepreneur and policymaker .  She is the CEO and co-founder of Results for America, [ 1 ] a nonprofit organization dedicated to using evidence-based practices to get results-driven solutions. [ buzzword ] She is a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress focusing on building a policy environment to support social entrepreneurship . [ 2 ] She was appointed by President Obama in December 2010 to be a member of the White House Council for Community Solutions . [ 3 ] In 2016, Jolin was elected as a fellow of the National Academy of Public Administration. [ 4 ]",
  "Mike DeCarlo (born March 14, 1957) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is an American comics artist . He is best known for his work for DC Comics in the 1980s inking the artwork of such artists as George Pérez , Greg LaRocque , Keith Giffen , and Jim Aparo .",
  "Mikhail Afanasyevich Bulgakov ( / b ʊ l ˈ ɡ ɑː k ɒ f / buul- GAH -kof ; Russian: Михаил Афанасьевич Булгаков , IPA: [mʲɪxɐˈil ɐfɐˈnasʲjɪvʲɪdʑ bʊlˈɡakəf] ; [ 1 ] 15 May [ O.S. 3 May] 1891 – 10 March 1940) was a Soviet novelist and playwright of Russian origin. His novel The Master and Margarita , [ 2 ] published posthumously, has been called one of the masterpieces of the 20th century. [ 3 ]",
  "In Australia , a milk bar is a suburban local general store which can include delicatessens or \"delis\" and corner shops or corner stores . [ 1 ] Similar, but not identical, establishments include tuck shops . Milk bars are traditionally a place where people buy newspapers, and fast-food items such as fish and chips, hamburgers, milkshakes , and snacks. They are essentially a smaller-scale suburban form of the convenience store but are more likely to be \"mum and dad\" small businesses rather than larger franchised operations. The term is also found in New Zealand , alongside the more local term dairy .",
  "A mime artist , or simply mime (from Greek μῖμος , mimos , \"imitator, actor\"), [ 1 ] is a person who uses mime (also called pantomime outside of Britain), the acting out of a story through body motions without the use of speech , as a theatrical medium or as a performance art . In earlier times, in English, such a performer would typically be referred to as a mummer . Miming is distinguished from silent comedy , in which the artist is a character in a film or skit without sound.",
  "Minhag ( Hebrew : מנהג \"custom\", classical pl. מנהגות, modern pl. מנהגים, minhagim ) is an accepted tradition or group of traditions in Judaism . A related concept, Nusach (נוסח), refers to the traditional order and form of the prayers .",
  "In the early editions of the Modern Olympic Games , individuals from different nations were allowed to compete as a team. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) grouped their results together under the mixed team designation. [ 1 ]",
  "Jean-Baptiste Poquelin ( French: [ʒɑ̃ batist pɔklɛ̃] ; 15 January 1622 (baptised) – 17 February 1673), known by his stage name Molière ( UK : / ˈ m ɒ l i ɛər , ˈ m oʊ l -/ , US : / m oʊ l ˈ j ɛər , ˌ m oʊ l i ˈ ɛər / ; [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] French: [mɔljɛʁ] ⓘ ), was a French playwright, actor, and poet, widely regarded as one of the great writers in the French language and world literature. His extant works include comedies , farces , tragicomedies , comédie-ballets , and more. His plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed at the Comédie-Française more often than those of any other playwright today. [ 4 ] His influence is such that the French language is often referred to as the \"language of Molière\". [ 5 ]",
  "Mons / ˈ m ɒ n z / [ 2 ] (plural: montes / ˈ m ɒ n t iː z / , [ 2 ] from the Latin word for \"mountain\") is a mountain on a celestial body. The term is used in planetary nomenclature : it is a part of the international names of such features. It is capitalized and usually stands after the proper given name, but stands before it in the case of lunar mountains (for example, there is a Martian mountain Arsia Mons and a lunar mountain Mons Argaeus ). [ 3 ]",
  "The Musée d'Orsay ( UK : / ˌ m juː z eɪ d ɔːr ˈ s eɪ / MEW -zay dor- SAY , US : / m juː ˈ z eɪ -/ mew- ZAY -⁠ , French: [myze dɔʁsɛ] ) (English: Orsay Museum ) is a museum in Paris , France , on the Left Bank of the Seine . It is housed in the former Gare d'Orsay , a Beaux-Arts railway station built from 1898 to 1900. The museum holds mainly French art dating from 1848 to 1914, including paintings, sculptures, furniture, and photography. It houses the largest collection of Impressionist and post-Impressionist masterpieces in the world, by painters including Berthe Morisot , Claude Monet , Édouard Manet , Degas , Renoir , Cézanne , Seurat , Sisley , Gauguin , and van Gogh . Many of these works were held at the Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume prior to the museum's opening in 1986. It is one of the largest art museums in Europe.",
  "Musical theatre is a form of theatrical performance that combines songs, spoken dialogue , acting and dance. The story and emotional content of a musical – humor, pathos , love, anger – are communicated through words, music, movement and technical aspects of the entertainment as an integrated whole. Although musical theatre overlaps with other theatrical forms like opera and dance, it may be distinguished by the equal importance given to the music as compared with the dialogue, movement and other elements. Since the early 20th century, musical theatre stage works have generally been called, simply, musicals .",
  "Naoko Takeuchi ( Japanese : 武内 直子 , Hepburn : Takeuchi Naoko , born March 15, 1967) is a Japanese manga artist . She is best known as the author of Sailor Moon , one of the most popular manga series of all time. [ 2 ] She has won several awards, including the 1993 Kodansha Manga Award for Sailor Moon . [ 3 ]",
  "Naryshkin Baroque , also referred to as Moscow Baroque or Muscovite Baroque , is a particular style of Baroque architecture and decoration that was fashionable in Moscow from the late 17th century into the early 18th century. In the late 17th century, the Western European Baroque style of architecture combined with traditional Russian architecture to form this unique style. It is called Muscovite Baroque as it was originally only found within Moscow and the surrounding areas. It is more commonly referred to as Naryshkin Baroque, as the first church designed in this style was built on one of the Naryshkin family 's estates. [ 2 ]",
  "The National Festival of Polish Song in Opole ( Polish : Krajowy Festiwal Piosenki Polskiej w Opolu , KFPP), commonly known as the Opole Festival ( Polish : Festiwal w Opolu ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is an annual music festival in Opole , Poland . Together with the Sopot Festival it is one of the two most important music festivals in Poland.",
  "In philosophy , naturalism is the idea that only natural laws and forces (as opposed to supernatural ones) operate in the universe . [ 1 ] In its primary sense, [ 2 ] it is also known as ontological naturalism , metaphysical naturalism , pure naturalism , philosophical naturalism and antisupernaturalism .   \"Ontological\" refers to ontology , the philosophical study of what exists. Philosophers often treat naturalism as equivalent to materialism , but there are important distinctions between the philosophies.",
  "The Nebula Awards annually recognize the best works of science fiction or fantasy published in the United States. The awards are organized and awarded by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers Association (SFWA), a nonprofit association of professional science fiction and fantasy writers. They were first presented in 1966 and are awarded in four categories for literary works of different lengths. A fifth category for film and television episode scripts was given 1974–78 and 2000–09, and a sixth category for game writing was begun in 2018. In 2019 SFWA announced that two awards that were previously run under the same rules but not considered Nebula awards—the Andre Norton Award for Middle Grade and Young Adult Fiction and the Ray Bradbury Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation —were to be considered official Nebula awards. [ 1 ] The rules governing the Nebula Awards have changed several times during the awards' history, most recently in 2010. The SFWA Nebula Conference , at which the awards are announced and presented, is held each spring in the United States. Locations vary from year to year.",
  "The New York Film Festival ( NYFF ) is a film festival held every fall in New York City , presented by Film at Lincoln Center . Founded in 1963 by Richard Roud and Amos Vogel with the support of Lincoln Center president William Schuman , NYFF is one of the longest-running and most prestigious film festivals in the United States. [ 1 ] It is a non-competitive festival centered on a \"Main Slate\" of typically 20–30 feature films, with additional sections for experimental cinema and new restorations.",
  "A newsletter is a printed or electronic report containing news concerning the activities of a business or an organization that is sent to its members, customers, employees or other subscribers . Newsletters generally contain one main topic of interest to its recipients and may be considered grey literature . E-newsletters are delivered electronically via e-mail and can be viewed as spamming if e-mail marketing is sent unsolicited. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ]",
  "Nitro Records was an American independent record label , founded in 1994 and operated by The Offspring's Dexter Holland and Greg K. Nitro is famous for being an incubator for punk rock artists who have subsequently become successful, most notably AFI . The label has also released albums from classic punk bands, including The Damned and T.S.O.L.",
  "A nod of the head is a gesture in which the head is tilted in alternating up and down arcs along the sagittal plane .  In many cultures , it is most commonly, but not universally, used to indicate agreement , acceptance , or acknowledgement .",
  "Nunsploitation is a subgenre of exploitation film which had its peak in Europe in the 1970s. These films typically involve Christian nuns living in convents during the Middle Ages . The main conflict of the story is usually of a religious or sexual nature, such as religious oppression or sexual suppression due to living in celibacy . The Inquisition is another common theme. These films, although often seen as pure exploitation films, often contain criticism against religion in general and the Catholic Church in particular. Indeed, some protagonist dialogue voiced feminist consciousness and rejection of their subordinated social role. Many of these films were made in countries where the Catholic Church is influential, such as Italy and Spain. One atypical example of the genre, Killer Nun ( Suor Omicidi ), was set in then present-day Italy (1978).",
  "Oliver & Company is a 1988 American animated musical adventure film produced by Walt Disney Feature Animation and released by Walt Disney Pictures . It is inspired by the Charles Dickens novel Oliver Twist . In the film, Oliver is a homeless kitten who joins a gang of dogs to survive in the streets. Among other changes, the setting of the film was relocated from 19th century London to 1980s New York City, Fagin 's gang is made up of dogs (one of which is Dodger ), and Sykes is a loan shark .",
  "Onnagata ( 女形/女方 , lit. 'female role') , also oyama ( 女形 ) , are male actors who play female roles in kabuki theatre. [ 1 ] It originated in 1629 after women were banned from performing in kabuki performances. [ 2 ] There are many specific techniques that actors must learn to master the role of onnagata .",
  "Opera is a form of Western theatre in which music is a fundamental component and dramatic roles are taken by singers . Such a \"work\" (the literal translation of the Italian word \"opera\") is typically a collaboration between a composer and a librettist [ 1 ] and incorporates a number of the performing arts , such as acting , scenery , costume , and sometimes dance or ballet . The performance is typically given in an opera house , accompanied by an orchestra or smaller musical ensemble , which since the early 19th century has been led by a conductor . Although musical theatre is closely related to opera, the two are considered to be distinct from one another. [ 2 ]",
  "The Opera dei Pupi ( Sicilian : opra î pupi in Palermo, Sicilian : opira î pupi in Catania; [ 1 ] \"Opera of the Puppets\" ) is a marionette theatrical representation of Frankish romantic poems traditionally performed in Sicily , Italy.",
  "An original English-language manga or OEL manga is a comic book or graphic novel drawn in the style of manga and originally published in English. [ 1 ] The term \"international manga\", as used by the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs , encompasses all foreign comics which draw inspiration from the \"form of presentation and expression\" found in Japanese manga . [ 2 ] This may also apply to manga-inspired comics made in other languages.",
  "An orthography is a set of conventions for writing a language , including norms of spelling , punctuation , word boundaries , capitalization , hyphenation , and emphasis . Most national and international languages have an established writing system that has undergone substantial standardization, thus exhibiting less dialect variation than the spoken language. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] These processes can fossilize pronunciation patterns that are no longer routinely observed in speech (e.g. would and should ); they can also reflect deliberate efforts to introduce variability for the sake of national identity, as seen in Noah Webster 's efforts to introduce easily noticeable differences between American and British spelling (e.g. honor and honour ).",
  "Osteichthyes ( / ˌ ɒ s t iː ˈ ɪ k θ iː z / ost-ee- IK -theez ; from Ancient Greek ὀστέον ( ostéon ) ' bone ' and ἰχθύς ( ikhthús ) ' fish ' ), [ 2 ] also known as osteichthyans or commonly referred to as the bony fish , is a diverse clade of vertebrate animals that have endoskeletons primarily composed of bone tissue . They can be contrasted with the Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fish) and the extinct placoderms and acanthodians , which have endoskeletons primarily composed of cartilage . The vast majority of extant fish are members of Osteichthyes, being an extremely diverse and abundant group consisting of 45 orders , over 435 families and 28,000 species . [ 3 ]",
  "Paganism (from Latin pāgānus ' rural, rustic ' , later 'civilian') is a term first used in the fourth century by early Christians for people in the Roman Empire who practiced polytheism , [ 1 ] or ethnic religions other than Christianity , Judaism , and Samaritanism . In the time of the Roman Empire, individuals fell into the pagan class either because they were increasingly rural and provincial relative to the Christian population, or because they were not milites Christi (soldiers of Christ). [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Alternative terms used in Christian texts were hellene , gentile , and heathen . [ 1 ] Ritual sacrifice was an integral part of ancient Greco-Roman religion [ 4 ] and was regarded as an indication of whether a person was pagan or Christian. [ 4 ] Paganism has broadly connoted the \"religion of the peasantry \". [ 1 ] [ 5 ]",
  "Paint-on-glass animation is a technique for making animated films by manipulating slow-drying oil paints on sheets of glass . Gouache mixed with glycerine is sometimes used instead. The best-known practitioner of the technique is Russian animator Aleksandr Petrov ; he has used it in seven films, all of which have won awards.",
  "The Palace of Iturbide (1779 to 1785) is a large palatial residence located in the historic center of Mexico City at Madero Street #17. It was built by the Count of San Mateo Valparaíso as a wedding gift for his daughter. It gained the name “Palace of Iturbide” because Agustín de Iturbide lived there and accepted the crown of the First Mexican Empire (as Agustin I) at the palace after independence from Spain . Today, the restored building houses the Fomento Cultural Banamex ; it has been renamed the Palacio de Cultura Banamex.",
  "'Pataphysics ( French : 'pataphysique ) is a sardonic \" philosophy of science \" invented by French writer Alfred Jarry (1873–1907) [ 2 ] intended to be a parody of science. [ 3 ] Difficult to be simply defined or pinned down, it has been described as the \"science of imaginary solutions\". [ 4 ]",
  "Patricia Lee Smith (born December 30, 1946) is an American singer, songwriter, poet, painter, author, and photographer. Her 1975 debut album Horses made her an influential member of the New York City -based punk rock movement. [ 1 ] Smith has fused rock and poetry in her work. In 1978, her most widely known song, \" Because the Night ,\" co-written with Bruce Springsteen , reached number 13 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart [ 1 ] and number five on the UK Singles Chart .",
  "Paul Morand (13 March 1888 – 24 July 1976) was a French author whose short stories and novellas were lauded for their style, wit and descriptive power. His most productive literary period was the interwar period of the 1920s and 1930s. He was much admired by the upper echelons of society and the artistic avant-garde who made him a cult favorite. He has been categorized as an early Modernist and Imagist .",
  "Peter K. Schuster (born 7 March 1941) is a theoretical chemist known for his work with the German Nobel Laureate Manfred Eigen in developing the quasispecies model . His work has made great strides in the understanding of viruses and their replication, as well as theoretical mechanisms in the origin of life .",
  "The philosophy of mind is a branch of philosophy that deals with the nature of the mind and its relation to the body and the external world . The mind–body problem is a paradigmatic issue in philosophy of mind, although a number of other issues are addressed, such as the hard problem of consciousness and the nature of particular mental states. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Aspects of the mind that are studied include mental events , mental functions , mental properties , consciousness and its neural correlates , the ontology of the mind, the nature of cognition and of thought , and the relationship of the mind to the body.",
  "Physician writers are physicians who write creatively in fields outside their practice of medicine. The following is a partial list of physician-writers by historic epoch or century in which the author was born, or published their first non-medical piece, arranged in alphabetical order.",
  "A pianist ( US : / p iː ˈ æ n ɪ s t / pee- AN -ist , also / ˈ p iː ə n ɪ s t / PEE -ə-nist ) is a musician who plays the piano . A pianist's repertoire may include music from a diverse variety of styles, such as traditional classical music , jazz , blues , and popular music , including rock and roll . Most pianists can, to an extent, easily play other keyboard instruments such as the synthesizer , harpsichord , celesta , and the organ .",
  "A pin and hanger assembly is used to connect two plate girders of a bridge .  These assemblies are used to provide an expansion joint in the bridge.  One beam (the anchor span ) is set on a pier with a short section cantilevered out toward the next pier.   The other (the suspended span ) begins underneath the anchor span, and has its far end resting on the next pier.  The beams have holes directly above each other.  The two holes are connected using hangers , a pair of connecting plates sandwiching the bridge girders.  A pair of large steel pins through the plates and girder webbing provide the hinges, holding up the suspended span while allowing it to move longitudinally.  Large washers are bolted to each end of the pin to retain the hangers.  Exceptionally long spans may have two sets of girders cantilevered from opposite bridge piers with a third set of girders suspended by pin and hanger assemblies from both cantilevers.",
  "43°38′57.94″N 79°20′30.98″W ﻿ / ﻿ 43.6494278°N 79.3419389°W ﻿ / 43.6494278; -79.3419389 Pinewood Toronto Studios (formerly known as Filmport ) is a major film and television studio complex in Toronto , Ontario, Canada and is the largest of its kind in Canada. It is the first in Toronto capable of accommodating the production of large-scale films. [ 1 ] The studio is named for the British Pinewood Studios Group . In March 2018, it was announced that Bell Media would be buying a controlling stake in the studio.",
  "See List of Pinus species for complete taxonomy to species level. See list of pines by region for list of species by geographic distribution . A pine is any conifer tree or shrub in the genus Pinus ( / ˈ p aɪ n ə s / ) [ 2 ] of the family Pinaceae . Pinus is the sole genus in the subfamily Pinoideae .",
  "Pixar ( / ˈ p ɪ k s ɑːr / ), [ a ] doing business as Pixar Animation Studios , is an American animation studio based in Emeryville, California , known for its critically and commercially successful computer-animated feature films. Pixar is a subsidiary of Walt Disney Studios , a division of Disney Entertainment , a segment of the Walt Disney Company .",
  "Pixilation is a stop motion technique in which live actors are used as a frame-by-frame subject in an animated film, by repeatedly posing while one or more frame is taken and changing pose slightly before the next frame or frames. [ citation needed ] This technique is often used as a way to blend live actors with animated ones in a movie. [ citation needed ]",
  "See text Plants are the eukaryotes that form the kingdom Plantae ; they are predominantly photosynthetic . This means that they obtain their energy from sunlight , using chloroplasts derived from endosymbiosis with cyanobacteria to produce sugars from carbon dioxide and water, using the green pigment chlorophyll . Exceptions are parasitic plants that have lost the genes for chlorophyll and photosynthesis, and obtain their energy from other plants or fungi. Most plants are multicellular , except for some green algae.",
  "Master Ping Xiao Po [ a ] (born Li Lotus ) is the title character and protagonist of the Kung Fu Panda franchise , primarily voiced by Jack Black and Mick Wingert . He is an anthropomorphic giant panda who is improbably chosen as the champion of the Valley of Peace in the first film . [ 1 ]",
  "The pope ( Latin : papa , from Ancient Greek : πάππας , romanized : páppas , lit. 'father') [ 2 ] [ 3 ] is the bishop of Rome and the visible head [ a ] of the worldwide Catholic Church . He is also known as the supreme pontiff , [ b ] Roman pontiff , [ c ] or sovereign pontiff . From the eighth century until 1870, the pope was the sovereign or head of state of the Papal States , and since 1929 of the much smaller Vatican City state. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] From a Catholic viewpoint, the primacy of the bishop of Rome is largely derived from his role as the apostolic successor to Saint Peter , to whom primacy was conferred by Jesus , who gave Peter the Keys of Heaven and the powers of \"binding and loosing\", naming him as the \"rock\" upon which the Church would be built. The reigning pope is Francis , who was elected on 13 March 2013 . [ 6 ]",
  "When a message is replied to in e-mail , Internet forums , or Usenet , the original can often be included, or \"quoted\", in a variety of different posting styles . The main options are interleaved posting (also called inline replying , in which the different parts of the reply follow the relevant parts of the original post), bottom-posting (in which the reply follows the quote) or top-posting (in which the reply precedes the quoted original message). For each of those options, there is also the issue of whether trimming of the original text is allowed, required, or preferred.",
  "President is a common title for the head of state in most republics . Depending on the country, a president could be head of government , a ceremonial figurehead, or something between these two extremes.",
  "The Prishtina International Film Festival , also known as the Pristina Film Festival and PriFilmFest , is a film festival held annually in Pristina , Kosovo , that screens prominent international cinema productions in the Balkan region and beyond, and draws attention to the Kosovar film industry . It was created after the 2008 Kosovo declaration of independence . The first festival was held in 2009, and featured actress Vanessa Redgrave as the host. In 2015, the festival was cancelled due to a cut in funding by the Ministry of Culture of Kosovo. The 7th edition of the festival, which was scheduled to take place from 24 April to 1 May, was thus instead held in Tirana , Albania on 24 and 25 April and renamed to \"PriFest in Exile\". [ 1 ] [ 2 ]",
  "A protist ( / ˈ p r oʊ t ɪ s t / PROH -tist ) or protoctist is any eukaryotic organism that is not an animal , plant , or fungus . Protists do not form a natural group, or clade , but are a paraphyletic grouping of all descendants of the last eukaryotic common ancestor excluding plants, animals, and fungi.",
  "A pyramid (from Ancient Greek πυραμίς ( puramís ) ' pyramid ' ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a structure whose visible surfaces are triangular in broad outline and converge toward the top, making the appearance roughly a pyramid in the geometric sense . The base of a pyramid can be of any polygon shape, such as triangular or quadrilateral , and its surface-lines either filled or stepped.",
  "About 30 species; see text Pears are fruits produced and consumed around the world, growing on a tree and harvested in late summer into mid-autumn. The pear tree and shrub are a species of genus Pyrus / ˈ p aɪ r ə s / , in the family Rosaceae , bearing the pomaceous fruit of the same name. Several species of pears are valued for their edible fruit and juices, while others are cultivated as trees.",
  "Raquel Eliana Argandoña de la Fuente (December 5, 1957) is a Chilean actress, politician, TV host and beauty pageant titleholder. She was mayor of Pelarco in Chile's Maule Region after the 2000 Municipal Elections. She is best known for her role as the La Quintrala in the 1986 TV mini-series of the same name. Raquel Argandoña was the 1975 Miss Universo Chile . [ 1 ] Raquel is the mother of the actress-singer Raquel Calderón . [ 2 ]",
  "The Renaissance ( UK : / r ɪ ˈ n eɪ s ən s / rin- AY -sənss , US : / ˈ r ɛ n ə s ɑː n s / ⓘ REN -ə-sahnss ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ a ] is a period of history and a European cultural movement covering the 15th and 16th centuries. It marked the transition from the Middle Ages to modernity and was characterized by an effort to revive and surpass the ideas and achievements of classical antiquity . Associated with great social change in most fields and disciplines, including art , architecture , politics, literature , exploration and science , the Renaissance was first centered in the Republic of Florence , then spread to the rest of Italy and later throughout Europe. The term rinascita (\"rebirth\") first appeared in Lives of the Artists ( c. 1550 ) by Giorgio Vasari , while the corresponding French word renaissance was adopted into English as the term for this period during the 1830s. [ 4 ] [ b ]",
  "A restaurant is an establishment that prepares and serves food and drinks to customers . [ 1 ] Meals are generally served and eaten on the premises , but many restaurants also offer take-out and food delivery services . Restaurants vary greatly in appearance and offerings, including a wide variety of cuisines and service models ranging from inexpensive fast-food restaurants and cafeterias to mid-priced family restaurants , to high-priced luxury establishments.",
  "Rietheim is a village and former municipality in the district of Zurzach in the canton of Aargau in Switzerland . On 1 January 2022 the former municipalities of Bad Zurzach , Baldingen , Böbikon , Kaiserstuhl , Rekingen , Rietheim, Rümikon and Wislikofen merged into the new municipality of Zurzach .",
  "The rigaudon ( French: [ʁiɡodɔ̃, ʁiɡɔdɔ̃] , Occitan: [riɣawˈðu] ), anglicized as rigadon or rigadoon , is a French baroque dance with a lively duple metre .  The music is similar to that of a bourrée , but the rigaudon is rhythmically simpler with regular phrases (eight measure phrases are most common). It originated as a sprightly 17th-century French folk dance for couples. Traditionally, the folkdance was associated with the provinces of Vivarais , Languedoc , Dauphiné , and Provence in southern France, and it became popular as a court dance during the reign of Louis XIV . [ 1 ] Its hopping steps were adopted by the skillful dancers of the French and English courts, where it remained fashionable through the 18th century. By the close of the 18th century, however, it had given way in popularity as a ballroom dance (along with the passepied , bourrée , and gigue ) to the minuet ; [ 2 ] however, in the 20th century, Maurice Ravel would employ this baroque dance in his piano suite Le Tombeau de Couperin .",
  "Rossens ( French: [ʁɔsɑ̃s] , Franco-Provençal: [ʁɔˈʃɛ̃] ⓘ ) is a former municipality in the district of Sarine in the canton of Fribourg in Switzerland .  On 1 January 2016 it merged with Corpataux-Magnedens , Farvagny , Le Glèbe and Vuisternens-en-Ogoz to form the new municipality of Gibloux . [ 1 ]",
  "A royal free city , or free royal city ( Latin : libera regia civitas ), was the official term for the most important cities in the Kingdom of Hungary from the late 12th century [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] to the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 .",
  "The Corporación de Radio y Televisión Española, Sociedad Anónima, S. M. E. [ 4 ] ( Spanish: [koɾpoɾaˈθjon de ˈraðjoj teleβiˈsjon espaˈɲola] ; lit. transl. Spanish Broadcasting Corporation plc SOE ) known as Radiotelevisión Española (acronym RTVE , branded in logo in all lowercase ), is the state-owned public corporation that assumed in 2007 the indirect management of the Spanish public radio and television service known as Ente Público Radiotelevisión Española.",
  "The Sahitya Akademi Award is a literary  honour in India,  which the Sahitya Akademi , India's National Academy of Letters, annually confers on writers of the most outstanding books of literary merit published in any of the 22 languages of the 8th Schedule to the Indian constitution as well as in English and Rajasthani language . [ 1 ] [ 2 ]",
  "The County of Saintonge ( French pronunciation: [sɛ̃tɔ̃ʒ] ), historically spelled Xaintonge and Xainctonge , is a former province of France located on the west central Atlantic coast. The capital city was Saintes (Xaintes, Xainctes). Other principal towns include Saint-Jean-d'Angély , Jonzac , Frontenay-Rohan-Rohan , Royan , Marennes , Pons , and Barbezieux-Saint-Hilaire .",
  "Sandalwood is a class of woods from trees in the genus Santalum . The woods are heavy, yellow, and fine-grained, and, unlike many other aromatic woods, they retain their fragrance for decades. Sandalwood oil is extracted from the woods. Sandalwood is often cited as one of the most expensive woods in the world. Both the wood and the oil produce a distinctive fragrance that has been highly valued for centuries. Consequently, some species of these slow-growing trees have suffered over-harvesting in the past.",
  "A seed plant or spermatophyte ( lit. ' seed plant ' ; New Latin spermat- and Greek φυτόν (phytón)|plant}}), [ 1 ] also known as a phanerogam (taxon Phanerogamae ) or a phaenogam (taxon Phaenogamae ), is any plant that produces seeds . It is a category of embryophyte (i.e. land plant) that includes most of the familiar land plants, including the flowering plants and the gymnosperms , but not ferns , mosses , or algae .",
  "Seinen manga ( 青年漫画 ) is an editorial category of Japanese comics marketed toward young adult men. [ 1 ] In Japanese, the word seinen means \"youth\", but the term \" seinen manga\" is also used to describe the target audience of magazines like Weekly Manga Times and Weekly Manga Goraku , which write on topics of interest to male university students and workingmen. Seinen manga is distinguished from shōnen manga , which is for adolescent boys, and seijin-muke manga [ ja ] , which are intended for adult audiences and often contain explicit content.  Some seinen manga like xxxHolic share similarities with shōnen manga. Seinen manga can focus on action, politics, science fiction, fantasy, relationships, sports, or comedy. The female equivalent to seinen manga is josei manga .",
  "The Seiun Award ( 星雲賞 , Seiunshō ) is a Japanese speculative fiction award given each year for the best science fiction works and achievements during the previous calendar year. Organized and overseen by the Science Fiction Fan Groups' Association of Nippon ( SFFAN; 日本SFファングループ連合会議 , Nihon SF Fan Group Rengō Kaigi ) , the awards are given at the annual Japan Science Fiction Convention . [ 1 ] It is the oldest SF award in Japan, being given since the 9th Japan Science Fiction Convention in 1970.",
  "Servus , and various local variants thereof, is a salutation used in many parts of Central and Eastern Europe . It is a word of greeting or parting like the Italian ciao (which also comes from the slave meaning through Venetian s'ciavo ). [ 1 ]",
  "48°51′09″N 2°20′49″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.85250°N 2.34694°E ﻿ / 48.85250; 2.34694 Shakespeare and Company is an English-language bookstore opened in 1951 by George Whitman , located on Paris's Left Bank . The store was named after Sylvia Beach 's bookstore of the same name founded in 1919 on the Left Bank, which closed in 1941. Whitman adopted the \"Shakespeare and Company\" name for his store in 1964.",
  "Sharks are a group of elasmobranch cartilaginous fish characterized by a ribless endoskeleton , dermal denticles , five to seven gill slits on each side, and pectoral fins that are not fused to the head . Modern sharks are classified within the division Selachii [ 1 ] (or Selachimorpha ) [ 2 ] and are the sister group to the Batoidea ( rays and skates ). Some sources extend the term \"shark\" as an informal category including extinct members of Chondrichthyes (cartilaginous fish) with a shark-like morphology, such as hybodonts . Shark-like chondrichthyans such as Cladoselache and Doliodus first appeared in the Devonian Period (419–359 million years), though some fossilized chondrichthyan-like scales are as old as the Late Ordovician (458–444 million years ago). [ 3 ] The earliest confirmed modern sharks (selachimorphs) are known from the Early Jurassic around 200 million years ago , with the oldest known member being Agaleus , though records of true sharks may extend back as far as the Permian . [ 4 ]",
  "Sheet metal is metal formed into thin, flat pieces, usually by an industrial process. Thicknesses can vary significantly; extremely thin sheets are considered foil or leaf , and pieces thicker than 6 mm (0.25 in) are considered plate, such as plate steel, a class of structural steel .",
  "Shepperton Studios is a film studio located in Shepperton , Surrey , England, with a history dating back to 1931. It is now part of the Pinewood Studios Group . During its early existence, the studio was branded as Sound City (not to be confused with the Californian recording studio of the same name ).",
  "Shōnen manga ( 少年漫画 , lit. \"boys' comics \", also romanized as shonen , shounen or syônen ) is an editorial category of Japanese comics targeting an audience of both adolescent boys and young men. It is, along with shōjo manga (targeting adolescent girls and young women), seinen manga (targeting young adults and adult men), and josei manga (targeting adult women), one of the primary demographic categories of manga and, by extension, of Japanese anime . Shōnen manga is traditionally published in dedicated manga magazines that often almost exclusively target the shōnen demographic group.",
  "Showtime (also known as Paramount+ with Showtime [ a ] ) is an American premium television network and the flagship property of Showtime Networks , a sub-division of the Paramount Media Networks division of Paramount Global . Showtime's programming includes original television series produced exclusively for the linear network and developed for the co-owned Paramount+ streaming service, theatrically released and independent motion pictures , documentaries , and occasional stand-up comedy specials , made-for-TV movies , and softcore adult programming. [ citation needed ]",
  "A shrug is a gesture or posture performed by raising both shoulders . In certain countries, it is a representation of an individual either being indifferent about something or not knowing an answer to a question. [ 1 ]",
  "Singer House ( Russian : Дом компании «Зингер» ), also widely known as the House of the Book ( Russian : Дом книги ), is a historic building in Saint Petersburg , Russia . It is located at the intersection of Nevsky Prospekt and the Griboyedov Canal , directly opposite the Kazan Cathedral . It is recognized as a historical landmark and has official status as an object of Russian cultural heritage.",
  "The single whip law or the \"Single whip reform\" ( simplified Chinese : 一条鞭法 ; traditional Chinese : 一條鞭法 ; pinyin : Yì Tiáo Biān Fǎ ) was a fiscal law first instituted during the middle Ming dynasty , in the early 16th century, and then promulgated throughout the empire in 1580 by Zhang Juzheng . [ 1 ]",
  "Cristiano Ronaldo dos Santos Aveiro ( Portuguese pronunciation: [kɾiʃˈtjɐnu ʁɔˈnaldu] ⓘ ; born 5 February 1985) is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays as a forward for and captains both Saudi Pro League club Al-Nassr and the Portugal national team . Nicknamed CR7 , he is widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time, and has won numerous individual accolades throughout his professional footballing career , including five Ballon d'Or awards, a record three UEFA Men's Player of the Year Awards , four European Golden Shoes , and was named five times the world's best player by FIFA . [ note 3 ] He has won 33 trophies in his career , including seven league titles, five UEFA Champions Leagues and the UEFA European Championship . Ronaldo holds the records for most goals (140) and assists (42) in the Champions League, goals (14) and assists (8) in the European Championship, and most international appearances (219) and international goals (136). He is one of the few players to have made over 1,200 professional career appearances , the most by an outfield player, and has scored over 900 official senior career goals for club and country, making him the top goalscorer of all time. [ note 4 ]",
  "A skateboard is a type of sports equipment used for skateboarding . It is usually made of a specially designed 7–8-ply maple plywood deck and has polyurethane wheels attached to the underside by a pair of skateboarding trucks.",
  "A small press is a publisher with annual sales below a certain level or below a certain number of titles published. The terms \" indie publisher \" and \" independent press \" and others are sometimes used interchangeably.  However, when a distinction is drawn, there are about 100,000 small presses and about one million independent presses. [ 1 ]",
  "Wearing socks and sandals together is a controversial fashion combination and social phenomenon that is discussed in various countries and cultures. In some places it is considered a fashion faux pas . [ 1 ]",
  "A software publisher is a publishing company in the software industry between the developer and the distributor . In some companies, two or all three of these roles may be combined (and indeed, may reside in a single person, especially in the case of shareware).",
  "A solo dance is a dance done by an individual dancing alone, as opposed to couples dancing together but independently of others dancing at the same time, if any, and as opposed to groups of people dancing simultaneously in a coordinated manner. Solo dancers are usually the best dancers in a group or dance school. Most solo dancers start after about 6–7 years of dance or sooner. Most soloists are company kids from their dance school. They are usually in more than one dance.",
  "The Soo Line Railroad ( reporting mark SOO ) is one of the primary United States railroad subsidiaries for the CPKC Railway ( reporting mark CPKC ), one of six U.S. Class I railroads , controlled through the Soo Line Corporation . Although it is named for the Minneapolis, St. Paul and Sault Ste. Marie Railroad (MStP&SSM), which was commonly known as the Soo Line after the phonetic spelling of Sault , it was formed in 1961 by the consolidation of that company with two other CPKC subsidiaries: The Duluth, South Shore and Atlantic Railway , and the Wisconsin Central Railway . It is also the successor to other Class I railroads, including the Minneapolis, Northfield and Southern Railway (acquired 1982) and the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad (Milwaukee Road, acquired at bankruptcy in 1985). On the other hand, a large amount of mileage was spun off in 1987 to Wisconsin Central Ltd. , now part of the Canadian National Railway . The Soo Line Railroad and the Delaware and Hudson Railway , CPKC's other major subsidiary (before the 2008 DM&E acquisition), presently do business as the Canadian Pacific Railway (CP). Most equipment has been repainted into the CP scheme, but the U.S. Surface Transportation Board groups all of the company's U.S. subsidiaries under the Soo Line name for reporting purposes. [ 1 ] The Minneapolis headquarters are in the Canadian Pacific Plaza building, having moved from the nearby Soo Line Building .",
  "South Korea , [ c ] officially the Republic of Korea ( ROK ), [ d ] is a country in East Asia . It constitutes the southern half of the Korean Peninsula and borders North Korea along the Korean Demilitarized Zone , with the Yellow Sea to the west and the Sea of Japan to the east. Like North Korea, South Korea claims to be the sole legitimate government of the entire peninsula and adjacent islands . It has a population of 51.71 million, of which half live in the Seoul Metropolitan Area , the ninth most populous metropolitan area in the world ; other major cities include Busan , Daegu , and Incheon .",
  "Space rock is a music genre characterized by loose and lengthy song structures centered on instrumental textures that typically produce a hypnotic , otherworldly sound. [ 1 ] It may feature distorted and reverberation -laden guitars, minimal drumming, languid vocals, synthesizers , and lyrical themes of outer space and science fiction .",
  "The Stone Bell House ( Czech : Dům U Kamenného zvonu ) is located at the Old Town Square in Prague . It is located next to the Kinský Palace , on the corner of Old Town Square and Týnská street. The house is named after the stone bell embedded in the outside corner. The bell could be a reminder of the arrival of John of Bohemia to Prague in 1310, after a futile siege of the city occupied by Henry of Bohemia .",
  "Insurgent victory The Storming of the Bastille ( French : Prise de la Bastille [pʁiz də la bastij] ) occurred in Paris , France, on 14 July 1789,  was an act of political violence by revolutionary insurgents who attempted to storm and seize control of the medieval armoury , fortress, and political prison known as the Bastille . After four hours of fighting and 94 deaths, the insurgents were able to enter the Bastille. The governor of the Bastille, Bernard-René Jourdan de Launay , and several members of the garrison were killed after surrender. At the time, the Bastille represented royal authority in the centre of Paris. The prison contained only seven inmates at the time of its storming and was already scheduled for demolition but was seen by the revolutionaries as a symbol of the monarchy's abuse of power. Its fall was the flashpoint of the French Revolution .",
  "Studio 4°C Co., Ltd. ( 株式会社STUDIO 4°C , Kabushiki-Gaisha Sutajio Yondo Shī , stylized as STUDIO4°C) is a Japanese animation studio founded by Eiko Tanaka and Kōji Morimoto in 1986. The name comes from the temperature at which water is most dense . [ 1 ]",
  "A stunt performer , often called a stuntman or stuntwoman and occasionally stuntperson or stunt-person , is a trained professional who performs daring acts , often as a career. Stunt performers usually appear in films or on television, as opposed to a daredevil , who performs for a live audience. When they take the place of another actor, they are known as stunt doubles .",
  "A subterranean river (also known as an underground river ) is a river or watercourse that runs wholly or partly beneath the ground , one where the riverbed does not represent the surface of the Earth. [ 1 ] It is distinct from an aquifer , which may flow like a river but is contained within a permeable layer of rock or other unconsolidated materials. A river flowing below ground level in an open gorge is not classed as subterranean. [ 2 ]",
  "Sufism ( Arabic : الصوفية‎ , romanized : al-Ṣūfiyya or Arabic: التصوف‎ , romanized: al-Taṣawwuf ) is a mystic body of religious practice found within Islam which is characterized by a focus on Islamic purification , spirituality , ritualism , and asceticism . [ 1 ]",
  "Swept Away... by an Unusual Destiny in the Blue Sea of August ( Italian : Travolti da un insolito destino nell'azzurro mare d'agosto ), [ 4 ] usually shortened to Swept Away , is a 1974 Italian romantic adventure comedy drama written and directed by Lina Wertmüller , starring Giancarlo Giannini and Mariangela Melato . The film follows a wealthy woman whose yachting vacation with friends in the Mediterranean Sea takes an unexpected turn when she and one of the boat's crew are separated from the others and stranded on a desert island. The woman's capitalist beliefs and the man's communist convictions clash, but during their struggle to survive, their social roles are reversed.",
  "In common usage, salt is a mineral composed primarily of sodium chloride (NaCl). When used in food, especially in granulated form, it is more formally called table salt . In the form of a natural crystalline mineral, salt is also known as rock salt or halite . Salt is essential for life in general (being the source of the essential dietary minerals sodium and chlorine ), and saltiness is one of the basic human tastes . Salt is one of the oldest and most ubiquitous food seasonings , and is known to uniformly improve the taste perception of food, including otherwise unpalatable food. [ 1 ] Salting , brining , and pickling are ancient and important methods of food preservation .",
  "Tajikfilm ( Tajik : Тоҷикфилм , Russian : Таджикфильм ) is a Tajik (former Soviet ) film studio. [ 1 ] Tajikfilm was founded in 1930 as a newsreel studio; [ 2 ] the studio released its first feature film in 1932 and its first talkie in 1935. In 1941, Tajikfilm merged with Soyuzdetfilm , only to reemerge in 1943. The studio produced films in both Russian and Tajik . [ 3 ]",
  "Talk To Me is a cultural phenomenon first observed in New York City . In 2002, Bill Wetzel and Liz Barry started hanging out in lawn chairs on New York City street corners with a sign that said \"Talk To Me\".  What surprised many was that the couple appeared genuinely interested in the subjects that were addressed [ 1 ] [ 2 ] and that there was no ulterior motive to their project. [ 3 ]",
  "A technical writer is a professional communicator whose task is to convey complex information in simple terms to an audience of the general public or a very select group of readers. Technical writers research and create information through a variety of delivery media (electronic, printed, audio-visual, and even touch). [ 1 ] Example types of information include online help , manuals, white papers , design specifications , project plans, and software test plans. With the rise of e-learning , technical writers are increasingly hired to develop online training material.",
  "Telegram style , telegraph style , telegraphic style , or telegraphese [ 1 ] is a clipped way of writing which abbreviates words and packs information into the smallest possible number of words or characters. It originated in the telegraph age when telecommunication consisted only of short messages transmitted by hand over the telegraph wire. The telegraph companies charged for their service by the number of words in a message, with a maximum of 15 characters per word for a plain-language telegram , and 10 per word for one written in code. The style developed to minimize costs but still convey the message clearly and unambiguously.",
  "A tell in poker is a change in a player's behavior or demeanor that is claimed by some to give clues to that player's assessment of their hand. A player gains an advantage if they observe and understand the meaning of another player's tell, particularly if the tell is unconscious and reliable. Sometimes a player may fake a tell, hoping to induce their opponents to make poor judgments in response to the false tell. More often, people try to avoid giving out a tell, by maintaining a poker face regardless of how strong or weak their hand is.",
  "Terrestrial television , or over-the-air television ( OTA ) is a type of television broadcasting in which the content is transmitted via radio waves from the terrestrial (Earth-based) transmitter of a TV station to a TV receiver having an antenna . The term terrestrial is more common in Europe and Latin America, while in Canada and the United States it is called over-the-air or simply broadcast . This type of TV broadcast is distinguished from newer technologies, such as satellite television ( direct broadcast satellite or DBS television), in which the signal is transmitted to the receiver from an overhead satellite ; cable television , in which the signal is carried to the receiver through a cable ; and Internet Protocol television , in which the signal is received over an Internet stream or on a network utilizing the Internet Protocol . Terrestrial television stations broadcast on television channels with frequencies between about 52 and 600 MHz in the VHF and UHF bands. Since radio waves in these bands travel by line of sight , reception is generally limited by the visual horizon to distances of 64–97 kilometres (40–60 miles), although under better conditions and with tropospheric ducting , signals can sometimes be received hundreds of kilometers distant. [ 1 ]",
  "The Intouchables ( French : Intouchables , pronounced [ɛ̃tuʃablə] ), also known as Untouchable in the UK, Ireland, and Scandinavia, [ 2 ] [ circular reference ] is a 2011 French buddy comedy-drama film written and directed by Éric Toledano and Olivier Nakache . It stars François Cluzet and Omar Sy . The plot of the film is inspired by the true story of Philippe Pozzo di Borgo and his French-Algerian carer Abdel Sellou, [ 3 ] discovered by the directors in À la vie, à la mort , a documentary film. [ 4 ]",
  "The World Islands ( Arabic : جزر العالم , romanized : Juzur al-Ālam ) are an archipelago of small artificial islands constructed in the shape of a world map , located in the Persian Gulf , off the coast of Dubai , United Arab Emirates. [ 1 ] The World Islands are composed mainly of sand dredged from Dubai's shallow coastal waters and are one of several artificial island developments in the emirate. [ 1 ] The World's developer is Nakheel Properties , and the project was originally conceived by Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum , the ruler of Dubai. Construction was done by two Dutch joint-venture specialist companies, Van Oord and Boskalis , who also created the Palm Jumeirah .",
  "A tidal river is a river whose flow and level are caused by tides . A section of a larger river affected by the tides is a tidal reach , but it may sometimes be considered a tidal river if it had been given a separate and another title name.",
  "In broadcasting, time shifting is the recording of programming to a storage medium to be viewed or listened to after the live broadcasting. Typically, this refers to TV programming but it can also refer to radio shows via podcasts .",
  "Maria Kristina \" Tina \" Nordström Holmqvist (born 6 August 1973) is a Swedish celebrity chef and television personality from Helsingborg , Sweden. \nShe hosted the second season of New Scandinavian Cooking on PBS stations on American television, replacing Andreas Viestad as host of the show; she was succeeded by Claus Meyer. She also appeared in a subsequent series featuring the same cast in rotation called \"Perfect Day\", produced by Tellusworks/Anagram Produktion and directed by Andreas Lindergard.",
  "A trade magazine , also called a trade journal or trade paper (colloquially or disparagingly a trade rag ), is a magazine or newspaper whose target audience is people who work in a particular trade or industry. [ 1 ] The collective term for this area of publishing is the trade press . [ 2 ]",
  "Traditional animation (or classical animation , cel animation , or hand-drawn animation ) is an animation technique in which each frame is drawn by hand. The technique was the dominant form of animation of the 20th century, until there was a shift to computer animation in the industry, such as digital ink and paint and 3D computer animation .",
  "Folk music is a music genre that includes traditional folk music and the contemporary genre that evolved from the former during the 20th-century folk revival . Some types of folk music may be called world music . Traditional folk music has been defined in several ways: as music transmitted orally, music with unknown composers, music that is played on traditional instruments, music about cultural or national identity, music that changes between generations (folk process), music associated with a people's folklore , or music performed by custom over a long period of time. It has been contrasted with commercial and classical styles . The term originated in the 19th century, but folk music extends beyond that.",
  "A train (from Old French trahiner , from Latin trahere , \"to pull, to draw\") [ 1 ] is a series of connected vehicles that run along a railway track and transport people or freight . Trains are typically pulled or pushed by locomotives (often known simply as \"engines\"), though some are self-propelled, such as multiple units or railcars . Passengers and cargo are carried in railroad cars , also known as wagons or carriages. Trains are designed to a certain gauge , or distance between rails. Most trains operate on steel tracks with steel wheels, the low friction of which makes them more efficient than other forms of transport. Many countries use rail transport .",
  "Transport in Hungary relies on several main modes, including transport by road, rail, air and water. Hungary has a total of 159,568 km (99,150 mi) of public roads, of which 70,050 km (43,530 mi) are paved (including 1481 km of motorways , as of 2016); and 89,518 km (55,620 mi) are unpaved (2005 etc.):",
  "A university press is an academic publishing house specializing in monographs and scholarly journals. They are often an integral component of a large research university . They publish work that has been reviewed by scholars in the field. [ 2 ] They produce mainly academic works but also often have trade books for a lay audience. These trade books also get peer reviewed. [ 2 ] Many but not all university presses are nonprofit organizations, including the 160 members of the Association of University Presses . [ 3 ]",
  "See text Blueberries are a widely distributed and widespread group of perennial flowering plants with blue or purple berries. They are classified in the section Cyanococcus with the genus Vaccinium . [ 1 ] Commercial blueberries—both wild (lowbush) and cultivated (highbush)—are all native to North America. The highbush varieties were introduced into Europe during the 1930s. [ 2 ]",
  "Vaslav or Vatslav Nijinsky ( / ˌ v ɑː t s l ɑː f n ɪ ˈ ( d ) ʒ ɪ n s k i / ; Russian : Вацлав Фомич Нижинский , romanized : Vatslav Fomich Nizhinsky , IPA: [ˈvatsləf fɐˈmʲitɕ nʲɪˈʐɨnskʲɪj] ; Polish : Wacław Niżyński , IPA: [ˈvatswaf ɲiˈʐɨj̃skʲi] ; 12 March 1889 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] /1890 [ 3 ] – 8 April 1950) was a Russian [ 4 ] ballet dancer and choreographer of Polish ancestry. [ 5 ] He is regarded as the greatest male dancer of the early 20th century. [ 3 ]",
  "The Venice Film Festival or Venice International Film Festival ( Italian : Mostra Internazionale d'Arte Cinematografica della Biennale di Venezia , \"International Exhibition of Cinematographic Art of the Venice Biennale \") is an annual film festival held in Venice , Italy. It is the world's oldest film festival and one of the \"Big Five\" International film festivals worldwide, which include the Big Three European Film Festivals (Venice, Cannes, Berlin), alongside the Toronto International Film Festival in Canada and the Sundance Film Festival in the United States. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 1951, FIAPF formally accredited the festival. [ 4 ]",
  "A volcano is commonly defined as a vent or fissure in the crust of a planetary-mass object , such as Earth , that allows hot lava , volcanic ash , and gases to escape from a magma chamber below the surface. [ 1 ]",
  "Volkswagen ( VW ; German pronunciation: [ˈfolksˌvaːɡn̩] ⓘ ) [ Note 1 ] is a German automobile manufacturer based in Wolfsburg , Lower Saxony , Germany. Established in 1937 by The German Labour Front , it was revitalized into the global brand it is today after World War II by British Army officer Ivan Hirst . The company is well known for the Beetle and serves as the flagship marque of the Volkswagen Group , which became the world's largest automotive manufacturer by global sales in 2016 and 2017. [ 1 ]",
  "Vodún or vodúnsínsen is an African traditional religion practiced by the Aja , Ewe , and Fon peoples of Benin , Togo , Ghana , and Nigeria . Practitioners are commonly called vodúnsɛntó or Vodúnisants .",
  "A waffle is a dish made from leavened batter or dough that is cooked between two plates that are patterned to give a characteristic size, shape, and surface impression. There are many variations based on the type of waffle iron and recipe used. Waffles are eaten throughout the world, particularly in Belgium , which has over a dozen regional varieties. [ 1 ] Waffles may be made fresh or simply heated after having been commercially cooked and frozen.",
  "Wanderer was a German manufacturer of bicycles , motorcycles , automobiles , vans and other machinery . Established as Winklhofer & Jaenicke in 1896 by Johann Baptist Winklhofer and Richard Adolf Jaenicke, the company used the Wanderer brand name from 1911, making civilian automobiles until 1941 and military vehicles until 1945.",
  "Wilderness or wildlands (usually in the plural ) are Earth's natural environments that have not been significantly modified by human activity , or any nonurbanized land not under extensive agricultural cultivation. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term has traditionally referred to terrestrial environments, though growing attention is being placed on marine wilderness . Recent maps of wilderness [ 3 ] suggest it covers roughly one-quarter of Earth's terrestrial surface, but is being rapidly degraded by human activity. [ 4 ] Even less wilderness remains in the ocean , with only 13.2% free from intense human activity. [ 5 ]",
  "Trapping pits are deep pits dug into the ground, or built from stone, in order to trap animals.\nEuropean rock drawings and cave paintings reveal that bear, moose and wolf were hunted since the Stone Age using trapping pits. [ citation needed ] Remains of trapping pits used for hunting elk , reindeer , wolves , and bears can still be found in Northern Scandinavia . These pits, which can measure up to 4 by 7 metres (13 ft × 23 ft) in size and be up to several metres deep, were camouflaged with branches and leaves. They had steep sides lined with planks or masonry, making it impossible for the animal to escape once it had fallen in. When the animal had fallen into the pit, it was killed, either bled to death by sharpened sticks pointed upwards from the bottom of the pit, or in the case of pits without these sticks, dispatched by hunters waiting nearby. Some traps had a small rope enabling rodents and amphibians to escape. [ citation needed ]",
  "A writer is a person who uses written words in different writing styles , genres and techniques to communicate ideas, to inspire feelings and emotions, or to entertain. Writers may develop different forms of writing such as novels , short stories , monographs , travelogues , plays , screenplays , teleplays , songs , and essays as well as reports , educational material, and news articles that may be of interest to the general public . Writers' works are nowadays published across a wide range of media . Skilled writers who are able to use language to express ideas well, often contribute significantly to the cultural content of a society. [ 1 ]",
  "The Würzburg Residence (German: Würzburger Residenz ) is a palace in Würzburg , Germany. Johann Lukas von Hildebrandt and Maximilian von Welsch , representatives of the Austrian/Southern German Baroque style, were involved in the construction, as well as Robert de Cotte and Germain Boffrand , who were followers of the French style. Balthasar Neumann , court architect of the Bishop of Würzburg , was the principal architect of the Residence, which was commissioned by  the Prince-Bishop of Würzburg Johann Philipp Franz von Schönborn and his brother Friedrich Carl von Schönborn in 1720, and  completed in 1744. The Venetian painter Giovanni Battista Tiepolo , assisted by his son, Domenico , painted frescoes in the building.",
  "A xunfu was an important imperial Chinese provincial office under both the Ming (14th–17th centuries) and Qing (17th–20th centuries) dynasties. [ 1 ] However, the purview of the office under the two dynasties differed markedly. Under the Ming dynasty, the post originated around 1430 as a kind of inspector-general and ad hoc provincial-level administrator; such a xunfu is usually translated as a grand coordinator . [ 1 ] However, since the mid-17th century, xunfu became the title of a regular provincial governor overseeing civil administration in the Qing dynasty. [ 1 ]",
  "Ivan Daminikavich Lutsevich ( Belarusian : Іван Дамінікавіч Луцэвіч ; July 7 [ O.S. June 25] 1882 – 28 June 1942), better known by his pen name Yanka Kupala (Янка Купала), was a Belarusian poet and writer.",
  "A yếm or áo yếm ( Vietnamese: [ʔiəm˧˦] , chữ Nôm : 裺 or 襖裺) is a traditional Vietnamese undergarment that was once worn by Vietnamese women across all classes. It was most usually worn underneath a blouse or mantle to preserve modesty."
]