[
  "The Northeast Flag Replacement ( traditional Chinese : 東北易幟 ; simplified Chinese : 东北易帜 ; pinyin : Dōngběi Yìzhì ) refers to Zhang Xueliang 's announcement on 29 December 1928 that all banners of the Beiyang government in Manchuria would be replaced with the flag of the Nationalist government , thus nominally uniting China under one government.\n\nIn April 1928, Chiang Kai-shek was reinstated as commander of the National Revolutionary Army , the position he previously resigned from after taking responsibility for splitting the KMT during the First Northern Expedition . He proceeded with the Second Northern Expedition and was approaching Beijing near the end of May. The Beiyang government in Beijing was forced to dissolve as a result; Zhang Zuolin abandoned Beijing to return to Manchuria and was assassinated in the Huanggutun incident by the Japanese Kwantung Army . However, Manchuria was still held by the Fengtian clique , which hung the banner of the Beiyang government. The ultimate objective of the Northern Expedition was not fully accomplished.\n\nImmediately after the death of Zhang Zuolin, Zhang Xueliang returned to Shenyang to succeed his father's position. On July 1 he announced an armistice with the National Revolutionary Army and proclaimed that he would not interfere with the reunification. The Japanese were dissatisfied with the move and demanded Zhang to proclaim the independence of Manchuria. He refused the Japanese demand and proceeded with unification matters. On July 3 Chiang Kai-shek arrived in Beijing and met the representative from the Fengtian clique to discuss a peaceful settlement. This negotiation reflected the scramble between the US and Japan on her sphere of influence in China because the US supported Chiang Kai-shek unifying Manchuria. Under pressure from the US and Britain, Japan was diplomatically isolated on this issue. On December 29 Zhang Xueliang announced the replacement of all flags in Manchuria and accepted the jurisdiction of the Nationalist government. Two days later the Nationalist government appointed Zhang as commander of the Northeast Army. China was symbolically reunified at this point.",
  "Imam ( / ɪ ˈ m ɑː m / ; Arabic : إمام , imām ; pl. : أئمة , a'immah ) is an Islamic leadership position. For Sunni Muslims , Imam is most commonly used as the title of a prayer leader of a mosque . In this context, imams may lead Islamic prayers , serve as community leaders, and provide religious guidance. Thus for Sunnis, anyone can study the basic Islamic teachings and become an imam.\n\nFor most Shia Muslims , the Imams are absolute infallible leaders of the Islamic community after the Prophet. Shias consider the term to be only applicable to the members and descendants of the Ahl al-Bayt , the family of the Islamic prophet Muhammad . In Twelver Shi'ism there are 14 infallibles , 12 of which are Imams, the final being Imam Mahdi who will return at the end of times. The title was also used by the Zaidi Shia Imams of Yemen , who eventually founded the Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen (1918–1970).\n\nSunni Islam does not conceive of the role of imams in the same sense as Shia Islam : an important distinction often overlooked by non-Muslims. In everyday terms, an imam for Sunni Muslims is the person charged with leading formal Islamic prayers ( Fard )—even in locations besides the mosque—whenever prayer is performed in a group of two or more. The imam leads the worship and the congregation copies his actions. Friday sermons are most often given by an appointed imam. All mosques have an imam to lead the congregational prayers—even though it may sometimes just be a member from the gathered congregation rather than an officially appointed, salaried person. Women cannot be imams when men are present but are allowed to be when no men are present. An imam should be chosen, according to Hadith , [ which? ] based on his knowledge of the Quran and Sunnah and his moral character.\n\nAnother well-known use of the term is as an honorary title for a recognized religious scholarly authority in Islam. It is especially used for a jurist ( faqih ) and often for the founders of the four Sunni madhhab s or schools of jurisprudence ( fiqh ) , as well as an authority on Quranic exegesis ( tafsir ) , such as Al-Tabari or Ibn Kathir .\n\nIt may also refer to the Muhaddithūn or scholars who created the analytical sciences related to Hadith ; due to their scholarly authority, the term may also refer to the heads of Muhammad 's family in their generational times. \n\nImams are appointed by the state to work at mosques and they are required to be graduates of an İmam Hatip high school or have a university degree in theology. This is an official position regulated by the Presidency of Religious Affairs in Turkey and only men are appointed to this position, whilst female officials under the same state organisation work as preachers and Qur'an course tutors, religious services experts, etc. These officials are supposed to belong to the Hanafi school of the Sunni sect.\n\nA central figure in an Islamic movement is also called an imam, like Imam Nawawi in Syria.\n\nIn the Shi'a context, an imam is not only presented as the man of God par excellence , but as participating fully in the names, attributes, and acts that theology usually reserves for God alone. Imams have a meaning more central to belief, referring to leaders of the community. Twelver and Ismaili Shi'a believe that these imams are chosen by God to be perfect examples for the faithful and to lead all humanity in all aspects of life. They also believe that all the imams chosen are free from committing any sin, impeccability which is called ismah . These leaders must be followed since they are appointed by God.\n\nHere follows a list of the Twelvers Shia imams:\n\n(splitting open knowledge) \n\n(the Trustworthy)\n\nFatimah , also Fatimah al-Zahraa, daughter of Muhammed (615–632), is also considered infallible but not an Imam. The Shi'a believe that the last Imam, the 12th Imam Mahdi will one day emerge on the Day of Resurrection ( Qiyamah ).\n\nAt times, imams have held both secular and religious authority. This was the case in Oman among the Kharijite or Ibadi sects. At times, the imams were elected. At other times the position was inherited, as with the Yaruba dynasty from 1624 and 1742. See List of rulers of Oman , the Rustamid dynasty : 776–909, Nabhani dynasty : 1154–1624, the Yaruba dynasty : 1624–1742, the Al Said : 1744–present for further information. The Imamate of Futa Jallon (1727–1896) was a Fulani state in West Africa where secular power alternated between two lines of hereditary Imams, or almami . In the Zaidi Shiite sect, imams were secular as well as spiritual leaders who held power in Yemen for more than a thousand years. In 897, a Zaidi ruler, al-Hadi ila'l-Haqq Yahya , founded a line of such imams, a theocratic form of government which survived until the second half of the 20th century (See details under Zaidiyyah , History of Yemen , Imams of Yemen ). Saudi leaders were also referred to as \"Imams\", until that term was retired by Ibn Saud to be replaced by \"king\".\n\nRuhollah Khomeini is officially referred to as Imam in Iran . Several Iranian places and institutions are named \"Imam Khomeini\", including a city , an international airport , a hospital , and a university .",
  "Fußball-Club Bayern München e. V. ( FCB , German pronunciation: [ˈfuːsbalˌklʊp ˈbaɪɐn ˈmʏnçn̩] ), commonly known as Bayern Munich ( German : Bayern München ), FC Bayern ( pronounced [ˌɛft͡seː ˈbaɪɐn] ⓘ ) or simply Bayern , is a German professional sports club based in Munich , Bavaria . They are most known for their men's professional football team, who play in the Bundesliga , the top tier of the German football league system . Bayern are the most successful club in German football and are among the world's most decorated , having won a record 33 national titles , including eleven consecutive titles from 2013 to 2023 and a record 20 national cups , alongside numerous European titles.\n\nBayern Munich was founded in 1900 by eleven players, led by Franz John . Although Bayern won its first national championship in 1932 , the club was not selected for the Bundesliga during its inception in 1963 . The club found success in the mid-1970s when, under the captaincy of Franz Beckenbauer , they won the European Cup three consecutive times (1974–1976). Overall, Bayern have won six European Cup/UEFA Champions League titles (a German record), winning their sixth title in the 2020 final as part of the Treble , and it became the second European club to achieve this feat twice. Bayern has also won one UEFA Cup , one European Cup Winners' Cup , two UEFA Super Cups , two FIFA Club World Cups and two Intercontinental Cups , making it one of the most successful European clubs internationally , and the only German club to have won both international titles. Bayern players have accumulated five Ballon d'Or awards, two The Best FIFA Men's Player awards, five European Golden Shoe and three UEFA Men's Player of the Year awards, including UEFA Club Footballer of the Year .\n\nBy winning the 2020 FIFA Club World Cup , Bayern Munich became only the second club to win the \" sextuple \" (winning the League , Cup , and Champions League in one season followed by the Domestic Supercup , UEFA Supercup and Club World Cup in the next season), or all trophies that a club can win in a calendar year. Bayern Munich are one of five clubs to have won all three of UEFA's main club competitions and the only German club to achieve that. As of November 2024, Bayern Munich are ranked third in UEFA club rankings . The club has traditional local rivalries with 1860 Munich and 1. FC Nürnberg .\n\nSince the beginning of the 2005–06 season , Bayern has played its home games at the Allianz Arena . Previously, the team had played at Munich's Olympiastadion for 33 years. The team colours are red and white, and the crest shows the white and blue flag of Bavaria . Bayern Munich has the largest revenue out of any German sports club and the third highest-earning football club in the world, behind Barcelona and Real Madrid , earning €634.1 million in 2021 . \n\nBayern Munich is one of the most widely supported football clubs in the world, and in April 2025, Bayern had more than 400,000 official club members and 4,147 officially registered fan clubs, with over 322,000 members, making the club the largest sports club in the world by membership . The club has other departments for chess, handball, basketball , gymnastics, bowling, table tennis and senior football, with more than 1,100 active members. \n\nBayern Munich was founded by members of a Munich gymnastics club (MTV 1879). When a congregation of members of MTV 1879 decided on 27 February 1900 that the footballers of the club would not be allowed to join the German Football Association (DFB), eleven members of the football division left the congregation and on the same evening founded Fußball-Club Bayern München. Within a few months, Bayern achieved high-scoring victories against all local rivals, including a 15–0 win against Nordstern, and reached the semi-finals of the 1900–01 South German championship . In the following years, the club won some local trophies, and, in 1910–11, Bayern joined the newly founded \"Kreisliga\", the first regional Bavarian league. The club won this league in its first year, but did not win it again until the beginning of the First World War in 1914, which halted all football activities in Germany. By the end of its first decade of founding, Bayern had its first German national team player, Max Gablonsky. By 1920, it had over 700 members, making it the largest football club in Munich. \n\nIn the years after the war, Bayern won several regional competitions before winning its first South German championship in 1926, an achievement repeated two years later. Its first national title was gained in 1932 , when coach Richard \"Little Dombi\" Kohn led the team to the German championship by defeating Eintracht Frankfurt 2–0 in the final. \n\nThe rise of Adolf Hitler to power put an abrupt end to Bayern's development. Club president Kurt Landauer and the coach, both of whom were Jewish, left the country. Many others in the club were also purged. Bayern was taunted as the \" Jew's club \", while local rival 1860 Munich gained much support. Josef Sauter, who was inaugurated in 1943, was the only NSDAP member as president. After a friendly match in Switzerland, some Bayern players greeted Landauer, who was a spectator, and the club was subject to continued discrimination. Bayern was also affected by the ruling that football players had to be full amateurs again, which led to the move of gifted young centre-forward Oskar Rohr to Switzerland . In the following years, Bayern could not sustain its role of contender for the national title, achieving mid-table results in its regional league instead. \n\nAfter the end of the Second World War in 1945, Bayern became a member of the Oberliga Süd , the southern conference of the German first division, which was split five ways at that time. Bayern struggled, hiring and firing 13 coaches between 1945 and 1963. Landauer returned from exile in 1947, and was once again appointed club president, the tenure lasted until 1951. He remains as the club's president with the longest accumulated tenure. Landauer has been deemed the most important figure in Bayern's transition to a professional club. In 1955, the club was relegated but returned to the Oberliga in the following season and won the DFB-Pokal for the first time, beating Fortuna Düsseldorf 1–0 in the final . \n\nThe club struggled financially, though, verging on bankruptcy at the end of the 1950s. President Reitlinger was ousted in the club's elections of 1958 by the industrialist Roland Endler, who provided financial stability for the club. Under his reign, Bayern had its best years in the Oberliga. Endler was no longer a candidate in 1962, when Wilhelm Neudecker , who became wealthy in the postwar construction boom, replaced him.\n\nIn 1963, the Oberligas in Germany were consolidated into one national league, the Bundesliga . Five teams from the Oberliga South were admitted. The key to qualifying for the Bundesliga was the accumulated record of the last twelve years, where Bayern was only the sixth-ranked club. To boot, local rivals 1860 Munich , ranked seventh, were champions of the last Oberliga-Süd season and were given preference on the basis of this achievement. After initial protests by Bayern for alleged mistreatment remained fruitless, president Neudecker rose to the challenge and hired Zlatko Čajkovski , who in 1962 led 1. FC Köln to the national championship. Fielding a team with young players like Franz Beckenbauer , Gerd Müller and Sepp Maier – who would later be collectively referred to as the axis , they achieved promotion to the Bundesliga in 1965. \n\nIn their first Bundesliga season , Bayern finished third and also won the DFB-Pokal . This qualified them for the following year's European Cup Winners' Cup , which they won in the final against Scottish club Rangers , Franz Roth scoring the decider in a 1–0 extra time victory. In 1967, Bayern retained the DFB-Pokal , but slow overall progress saw Branko Zebec take over as coach. He replaced Bayern's offensive style of play with a more disciplined approach, and in doing so achieved the first league and cup double in Bundesliga history in 1969. Bayern Munich are one of five German clubs to win the Bundesliga and DFB-Pokal in the same season along with Borussia Dortmund , 1. FC Köln , Werder Bremen and Bayer Leverkusen . Zebec used only 13 players throughout the season . \n\nUdo Lattek took charge in 1970. After winning the DFB-Pokal in his first season , Lattek led Bayern to their third German championship . The deciding match in the 1971–72 season against Schalke 04 was the first match in the new Olympiastadion , and was also the first live televised match in Bundesliga history. Bayern beat Schalke 5–1, so won the title, while also setting several records, including points gained and goals scored. Bayern also won the next two championships, but the zenith was their triumph in the 1974 European Cup Final against Atlético Madrid , which Bayern won 4–0 after a replay. This title – after winning the Cup Winners' trophy 1967 and two semi-finals ( 1968 and 1972 ) in that competition – marked the club's breakthrough as a force on the international stage.\n\nDuring the following years, the team was unsuccessful domestically, but defended their European title by defeating Leeds United in the 1975 European Cup final , when Roth and Müller secured victory with late goals. \"We came back into the game and scored two lucky goals, so in the end, we were the winners, but we were very, very lucky\", stated Franz Beckenbauer. Billy Bremner believed the French referee was \"very suspicious\". Leeds fans then rioted in Paris and were banned from European football for three years. A year later in the final in Glasgow , another Roth goal helped defeat Saint-Étienne , and Bayern became the third club to win the trophy in three consecutive years. The final trophy won by Bayern in this era was the Intercontinental Cup , in which they defeated Brazilian club Cruzeiro over two legs. The rest of the decade was a time of change and saw no further titles for Bayern. In 1977, Franz Beckenbauer left for New York Cosmos and, in 1979, Sepp Maier and Uli Hoeneß retired while Gerd Müller joined the Fort Lauderdale Strikers . Bayerndusel was coined during this period as an expression of either contempt or envy about the sometimes narrow and last-minute wins against other teams. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe 1980s were a period of off-field turmoil for Bayern, with many changes in personnel and financial problems. On the field, Paul Breitner and Karl-Heinz Rummenigge , termed \"FC Breitnigge\", led the team to Bundesliga titles in 1980 and 1981 . Apart from a DFB-Pokal win in 1982 , two relatively unsuccessful seasons followed, after which Breitner retired, and former coach Udo Lattek returned. Bayern won the DFB-Pokal in 1984 and went on to win five Bundesliga championships in six seasons, including a double in 1986 . European success, however, was elusive during the decade; Bayern, though, finished as runner-up in the European Cups of 1982 and 1987 . \n\nJupp Heynckes was hired as coach in 1987, but after two consecutive championships in 1988–89 and 1989–90 , Bayern's form dipped. After finishing second in 1990–91 , the club finished just five points above the relegation places in 1991–92 . In 1993–94 , Bayern was eliminated in the UEFA Cup second round to Premier League side Norwich City , who were the only English club to beat Bayern at the Olympiastadion during Bayern's time playing there. Franz Beckenbauer took over for the second half of the 1993–94 season, winning the championship again after a four-year gap. Beckenbauer was then appointed club president. \n\nHis successors as coach, Giovanni Trapattoni and Otto Rehhagel , both finished trophyless after a season, not meeting the club's high expectations. During this time, Bayern's players frequently appeared in the gossip pages of the press rather than the sports pages, resulting in the nickname \"FC Hollywood\". Franz Beckenbauer briefly returned at the end of the 1995–96 season as caretaker coach and led his team to victory in the UEFA Cup , beating Bordeaux in the final . For the 1996–97 season , Trapattoni returned to win the championship . In the following season , Bayern lost the title to newly promoted Kaiserslautern and Trapattoni had to take his leave for the second time. \n\nAfter his success at Borussia Dortmund, Bayern were coached by Ottmar Hitzfeld from 1998 to 2004. In Hitzfeld's first season , Bayern won the Bundesliga and came close to winning the Champions League , losing 2–1 to Manchester United into injury time after leading for most of the match . The following year, in the club's centenary season , Bayern won the third league and cup double in its history. A third consecutive Bundesliga title followed in 2001 , won with a stoppage time goal on the final day of the league season. Days later, Bayern won the Champions League for the fourth time after a 25-year gap, defeating Valencia on penalties . The 2001–02 season began with a win in the Intercontinental Cup , but ended trophyless otherwise. In 2002–03 , Bayern won their fourth double, leading the league by a record margin of 16 points. Hitzfeld's reign ended in 2004, with Bayern underperforming, including defeat by second division Alemannia Aachen in the DFB-Pokal . \n\nFelix Magath took over and led Bayern to two consecutive doubles. Prior to the start of the 2005–06 season , Bayern moved from the Olympiastadion to the new Allianz Arena , which the club shared with 1860 Munich. On the field, their performance in 2006–07 was erratic. Trailing in the league and having lost to Alemannia Aachen in the cup yet again, coach Magath was sacked shortly after the winter break. \n\nHitzfeld returned as a trainer in January 2007, but Bayern finished the 2006–07 season in fourth position, meaning no Champions League qualification for the first time in more than a decade. Additional losses in the DFB-Pokal and the DFB-Ligapokal left the club with no honours for the season. [ citation needed ]\n\nFor the 2007–08 season , Bayern made drastic squad changes to help rebuild. Among new signings were 2006 World Cup players such as Franck Ribéry , Miroslav Klose and Luca Toni . Bayern won the Bundesliga in convincing fashion, leading the standings on every single week of play, and the DFB-Pokal against Borussia Dortmund. After the season, Bayern's long-term goalkeeper Oliver Kahn retired, which left the club without a top-tier goalkeeper for several seasons. The club's coach Ottmar Hitzfeld also retired and Jürgen Klinsmann was chosen as his successor. However, Klinsmann was sacked before the end of his first season as Bayern trailed Wolfsburg in the league, had lost the quarterfinal of the DFB-Pokal to Bayer Leverkusen , and were defeated in the quarterfinal of the Champions League by Barcelona , conceding four goals in the first half of the first leg. Jupp Heynckes was named caretaker coach and led the club to a second-place finish in the league. \n\nFor the 2009–10 season , Bayern hired Dutch manager Louis van Gaal , and Dutch forward Arjen Robben joined Bayern. Robben, alongside Ribéry, would go on to shape Bayern's playstyle of attacking over the wings for the next ten years. The press quickly dubbed the duo \"Robbery\". In addition, David Alaba and Thomas Müller were promoted to the first team. Van Gaal stated: \"With me, Müller always plays\", which has become a much-referenced phrase over the years. On the pitch, Bayern had its most successful season since 2001, securing the domestic double and losing only in the final of the Champions League to Inter Milan. Van Gaal was fired in April 2011 as Bayern was trailing in the league and eliminated in the first knockout round of the Champions League , again by Inter. \n\nHeynckes returned for his second permanent spell in the 2011–12 season. Although the club had signed Manuel Neuer , ending Bayern's quest for an adequate substitute for Kahn, and Jérôme Boateng for the season, Bayern remained without a title for a second consecutive season, coming in second to Borussia Dortmund in the league and the cup. The Champions League final was held at the Allianz Arena and Bayern reached the final in their home stadium but lost to Chelsea on penalties. Bayern Munich went on to win all titles in 2012–13 . They set various Bundesliga records along the way, becoming the first German team to win the treble . Bayern finished the Bundesliga on 91 points, only eleven points shy of a perfect season. In what was Bayern's third Champions League final appearance within four years, they beat Borussia Dortmund 2–1. A week later, they completed the treble by winning the DFB-Pokal final against Stuttgart . During the season, the club announced that they would hire Pep Guardiola as coach for the 2013–14 season . Originally, the club presented this as Heynckes retiring on the expiration of his contract, but Uli Hoeneß later admitted that it was not Heynckes's decision to leave Bayern at the end of the season. It was actually forced by the club's desire to appoint Guardiola. \n\nGuardiola's first season started off well, with Bayern extending a streak of undefeated league matches from the previous season to 53 matches. An eventual loss to Augsburg came two match days after Bayern had won the league title. During the season, Bayern had also claimed two other titles, the FIFA Club World Cup and the UEFA Super Cup , the latter being the last major trophy the club had not yet won. Bayern also won the cup to complete their tenth domestic double, but lost in the semi-final of the Champions League to Real Madrid . Off the pitch, Bayern's president Uli Hoeneß was convicted of tax evasion in March 2014, and sentenced to 3 + 1 ⁄ 2 years in prison. Hoeneß resigned the next day, and vice-president Karl Hopfner was elected president in May. Under Guardiola, Bayern also won the Bundesliga in 2014–15 and 2015–16 , including another double in 2015–16, but did not advance past the semi-finals in the Champions League. Although the club's leadership tried to convince Guardiola to stay, the coach decided not to extend his three-year contract. \n\nCarlo Ancelotti was hired as successor to Guardiola. Off the pitch, Uli Hoeneß had been released early from prison and reelected as president in November 2016. Under Ancelotti, Bayern won a fifth consecutive league title. In July 2017, Bayern announced that 1860 Munich would leave the Allianz Arena for good as the club had been relegated to the fourth-tier Regionalliga . During the 2017–18 season , Bayern's performances were perceived to be increasingly lacklustre, and Ancelotti was sacked after a 3–0 loss to Paris St. Germain in the Champions League , early in his second season. Willy Sagnol took over as interim manager for a week, before Jupp Heynckes was announced as coach for the rest of the season, in what was his fourth spell at the club. During the season, the club urged Heynckes—even publicly—to extend his contract, but Heynckes, aged 73, stayed firm that he would retire after the season. Heynckes led the club to another championship, but lost the cup final against Eintracht Frankfurt . Eintracht's coach, Niko Kovač , was named Heynckes' successor at Bayern. In Kovač's first season at Bayern, the club was eliminated by Liverpool in the round of 16 in the Champions League, the first time since 2011 that Bayern did not reach the quarter-final. Bayern won their seventh straight Bundesliga title, however, as they finished two points above Dortmund with 78 points. This Bundesliga title was Ribéry's ninth and Robben's eighth. A week later, Bayern defeated RB Leipzig 3–0 in the 2019 DFB-Pokal final to win their 19th German Cup and to complete their 12th domestic double. \n\nKovač was sacked after a 5–1 loss to Eintracht Frankfurt, with Hansi Flick being promoted to interim manager in November 2019. After a satisfying spell as interim, Bayern announced a month later that Flick would remain in charge. Under Flick, the club won the league , having played the most successful second half of a Bundesliga season in history, winning all but one match, which was drawn. The club also won the cup , completing the club's 13th domestic double. In the Champions League , Bayern reached their first final since 2013, having beaten Barcelona 8–2 in the quarter-finals. Bayern defeated Paris Saint-Germain 1–0 in the final , which was held in Lisbon behind closed doors due to the COVID-19 pandemic . Former PSG player Kingsley Coman scored the only goal of the match. Bayern became the second European club after Barcelona to complete the seasonal treble in two different seasons. \n\nBayern started the 2020–21 season by winning the UEFA Super Cup for the second time in their history. Bayern also won the FIFA Club World Cup , defeating Mexican team Tigres 1–0 in the final. Bayern became the second club to win the sextuple , after Barcelona did so in 2009. The club also won its ninth Bundesliga title in a row. During the season, Robert Lewandowski broke Gerd Müller 's record for most goals scored in a Bundesliga season, having scored 41 times in 29 matches. Flick left at the end of the 2020–21 season to manage the Germany national team, and at Flick's request, RB Leipzig manager Julian Nagelsmann succeeded him. According to several news reports, Bayern paid Leipzig €25m as compensation for Nagelsmann's services, a world record for a manager. \n\nUnder Nagelsmann, Bayern won its 10th consecutive Bundesliga title. In March 2023, Nagelsmann was released by Bayern and replaced with Thomas Tuchel , who led the club to a record eleventh consecutive title , after winning a close title race with Borussia Dortmund . In August 2023, Bayern broke the German transfer record again, signing England captain and all-time leading goalscorer Harry Kane from Tottenham Hotspur for a reported fee of €110m. In February 2024, Bayern and Tuchel announced the end of their cooperation after the end of the season. The 2023–24 Bundesliga was the first season in a decade Bayern Munich did not win the Bundesliga, losing it to Bayer Leverkusen . \n\nOn 29 May 2024, Vincent Kompany was confirmed as the new head coach of Bayern and received a three-year contract. Bayern started the 2024–25 Bundesliga season with a 3–2 win at VfL Wolfsburg . \n\nIn the original club constitution, Bayern's colours were named as white and blue, but the club played in white shirts with black shorts until 1905 when Bayern joined MSC. MSC decreed that the footballers would have to play in red shorts. Also, the younger players were called red shorts, which were meant as an insult. For most of the club's early history, Bayern had primarily worn white and maroon home kits. In 1968–69 season , Bayern changed to red and blue striped shirts, with blue shorts and socks. Between 1969 and 1973, the team wore a home strip of red and white striped shirts with either red or white shorts and red socks. In the 1973–74 season , the team switched to an all-white kit featuring single vertical red and blue stripes on the shirt. From 1974 onwards, Bayern has mostly worn an all-red home kit with white trim. Bayern revived the red and blue striped colour scheme between 1995 and 1997. In 1997, blue was the dominant colour for the first time when Adidas released an all navy blue home kit with a red chest band. In 1999, Bayern returned to a predominantly red kit, which featured blue sleeves, and, in 2000, the club released a traditional all-red kit with white trim to be worn for Champions League matches. Bayern also wore a Rotwein -coloured home kit in Bundesliga matches between 2001 and 2003, and during the 2006–07 Champions League campaign, in reference to their first-choice colours prior to the late 1960s. \n\nThe club's away kit has had a wide range of colours, including white, black, blue, and gold-green. Bayern also features a distinct international kit. During the 2013–14 season , Bayern used an all-red home kit with a Bavarian flag diamond watermark pattern, a Lederhosen -inspired white and black Oktoberfest away kit, and an all-navy blue international kit. \n\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, Bayern used a special away kit when playing at Kaiserslautern , representing the Brazilian colours blue and yellow, a superstition borne from the fact that the club found it hard to win there. [ failed verification ]\n\nBayern's crest has changed several times. Originally it consisted of the stylised letters F, C, B, M, which were woven into one symbol. The original crest was blue. The colours of Bavaria were included for the first time in 1954. The crest from 1919 to 1924 denotes \"Bayern FA\", whereby \"FA\" stands for Fußball-Abteilung , i.e., Football Department; Bayern then was integrated into TSV Jahn Munich and constituted its football department. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe modern version of the crest has changed from the 1954 version in several steps. While the crest consisted of a single colour only for most of the time, namely blue or red, the current crest is blue, red, and white. It has the colours of Bavaria in its centre, and FC Bayern München is written in white on a red ring enclosing the Bavarian colours.\n\nBayern played its first training games at the Schyrenplatz in the centre of Munich . The first official games were held on the Theresienwiese . In 1901, Bayern moved to a field of its own, located in Schwabing at the Clemensstraße . After joining the Münchner Sport-Club (MSC) in 1906, Bayern moved in May 1907 to MSC's ground at the Leopoldstraße . As the crowds gathering for Bayern's home games increased at the beginning of the 1920s, Bayern had to switch to various other premises in Munich. \n\nFrom 1925, Bayern shared the Grünwalder Stadion with 1860 Munich . Until the Second World War, the stadium was owned by 1860 Munich, and is still colloquially known as Sechz'ger (\"Sixties\") Stadium. It was destroyed during the war, and efforts to rebuild it resulted in a patchwork. Bayern's record crowd at the Grünwalder Stadion is reported as more than 50,000 in the home game against 1. FC Nürnberg in the 1961–62 season. In the Bundesliga era, the stadium had a maximum capacity of 44,000, which was reached on several occasions, but the capacity has since been reduced to 21,272. As was the case at most of this period's stadiums, the vast majority of the stadium was given over to terracing. Since 1995, the second teams and youth teams of both clubs played in the stadium. \n\nFor the 1972 Summer Olympics , the city of Munich built the Olympiastadion . The stadium, renowned for its architecture, was inaugurated in the last Bundesliga match of the 1971–72 season. The match drew a capacity crowd of 79,000, a total which was reached again on numerous occasions. In its early days, the stadium was considered one of the foremost stadiums in the world, and played host to numerous major finals, such as that of the 1974 FIFA World Cup . In the following years, the stadium underwent several modifications, such as an increase in seating space from approximately 50 per cent to 66 per cent. Eventually, the stadium had a capacity of 63,000 for national matches and 59,000 for international occasions such as European Cup competitions. Many people, however, began to feel that the stadium was too cold in winter, with half the audience exposed to the weather due to lack of cover. A further complaint was the distance between the spectators and the pitch, betraying the stadium's track and field heritage. Renovation proved impossible, as the architect Günther Behnisch vetoed major modifications of the stadium. \n\nAfter much discussion, the city of Munich, the state of Bavaria , Bayern Munich and 1860 Munich jointly decided at the end of 2000 to build a new stadium. While Bayern had wanted a purpose-built football stadium for several years, the awarding of the 2006 FIFA World Cup to Germany stimulated the discussion as the Olympiastadion no longer met the FIFA criteria to host a World Cup game. Located on the northern outskirts of Munich, the Allianz Arena has been in use since the beginning of the 2005–06 season. Since August 2012, 2,000 more seats were added in the last row of the top tier, increasing the capacity to 71,000. In January 2015, a proposal to increase the capacity was approved by the city council, with the Allianz Arena holding a capacity of 75,000 (70,000 in Champions League). \n\nThe stadium's most prominent feature is the translucent outer layer, which can be illuminated in different colours for effects. Red lighting is used for Bayern home games and white for Germany national team home games. \n\nIn May 2012, Bayern opened a museum about its history, FC Bayern Erlebniswelt, inside the Allianz Arena. \n\nAt the 2018 annual general meeting, the Bayern board reported that the club had 291,000 official members and 4,433 officially registered fan clubs with over 390,000 members. This made the club the largest fan membership club in the world. Bayern has an average of 75,000 fans at the Allianz Arena which is at 100 per cent capacity level. Every Bundesliga game has been sold-out for years. Bayern's away games have also been sold out for many years. According to a study by Sport+Markt from 2010, Bayern is the fifth-most popular football club in Europe with 20.7 million supporters, ranking first of all German clubs. \n\nThe club's most prominent ultra groups are Schickeria München , Inferno Bavaria , Red Munichs '89 , Südkurve '73 , Munichmaniacs 1996 , Red Angels , and Red Sharks . The ultras scene of Bayern Munch has been recognised for certain groups taking stance against right-wing extremism, racism and homophobia, and in 2014 the group Schickeria München received the Julius Hirsch Award by the DFB for its commitment against antisemitism and discrimination. \n\nStern des Südens is the song which fans sing at FCB home games. In the 1990s, they also used to sing FC Bayern, Forever Number One . Another notable song is Mia San Mia [ b ] ( Bavarian for \"we are who we are\"), which is a well-known motto of the club as well. A renowned catchphrase for the team is \" Packmas \", which is a Bavarian phrase for the German \" Packen wir es \", which means \"let's do it\". The club's mascot is an anthropomorphic bear named \"Berni\" since 2004. \n\nThe club also has had a number of high-profile supporters, among them Pope Benedict XVI , Boris Becker , Wladimir Klitschko , Horst Seehofer and Edmund Stoiber , former Minister-President of Bavaria. \n\nBayern–Dortmund are two of the most successful teams in German football, having won a combined total of 26 of the past 31 Bundesliga titles as of the 2023–24 season . The two teams fought closely for the Bundesliga title in the early 2010s, and met in the 2013 UEFA Champions League final . The rivalry between the clubs grew during the 1990s, as Dortmund's stature increased to challenge perennial title favourites Bayern, winning two Bundesliga titles in 1994–95 and 1995–96 .\n\nIn 1996, Bayern captain Lothar Matthäus accused Germany teammate Andreas Möller of being a 'crybaby', wiping imaginary tears from his face; Möller reacted by slapping Matthäus. At the end of that season, Dortmund won the 1997 UEFA Champions League final which happened to be played at the Olympiastadion , Bayern's home ground.\n\nThe teams met in the quarter-finals of the next edition of the Champions League, and Dortmund prevailed over two legs thanks to a single goal from Stéphane Chapuisat . That summer, Bayern hired Dortmund's successful coach Ottmar Hitzfeld to work for them. Tempers flared twice during Bayern and Dortmund's second meeting in the 1998–99 Bundesliga , as Bayern goalkeeper Oliver Kahn first attempted a flying kung-fu kick at Chapuisat, and later appeared to bite Heiko Herrlich 's ear.\n\nIn the early 2000s both clubs remained successful, as Bayern lost one Champions League final ( 1999 ) then won another ( 2001 ) in addition to more domestic success, while Dortmund won the 2001–02 Bundesliga and reached the UEFA Cup final the same year. An angry 2001 league meeting between the pair was notable for ten yellow cards and three red being shown (a Bundesliga record for indiscipline). However, Dortmund soon fell heavily into debt, and a €2m loan from Bayern in 2004 was a major reason for them being saved from bankruptcy .\n\nOn 19 April 2008, the two sides clashed in the 2008 DFB-Pokal final for the first time that took place in Berlin . Luca Toni opened the scoring after eleven minutes, but Mladen Petric drew Dortmund level in stoppage time, forcing thirty additional minutes. The Italian completed his double in extra time, thus lifting Bayern to cup glory.\n\nAmongst Bayern's chief European rivals are FC Barcelona , Real Madrid , AC Milan , and Manchester United . Real Madrid versus Bayern is the match that has historically been played most often in the Champions League/European Cup with 28 matches. Due to Bayern being traditionally hard to beat for Madrid, Madrid supporters often refer to Bayern as the \" Bestia negra \" (\"Black Beast\"). Despite the number of duels, Bayern and Real have never met in the final of a Champions League or European Cup.\n\nBayern is mostly led by former club players. From 2016 to 2019, Uli Hoeneß served as the club's president, following Karl Hopfner who had been in office from 2014; Hoeneß had resigned in 2014 after being convicted of tax fraud. Oliver Kahn was chairman of the executive board of the AG. The supervisory board of nine consists mostly of managers of big German corporations. Besides the club's president and the board's chairman, they are Herbert Hainer former CEO of (Adidas), Dr. Herbert Diess chairman of (Volkswagen), Dr. Werner Zedelius senior advisor at (Allianz), Timotheus Höttges CEO of (Deutsche Telekom), Dieter Mayer, Edmund Stoiber , Theodor Weimer CEO of (Deutsche Börse), and Dr. Michael Diederich speaker of the board at (UniCredit Bank). \n\nProfessional football at Bayern is run by the spin-off organisation FC Bayern München AG . AG is short for Aktiengesellschaft , and Bayern is run like a joint stock company , a company whose stock are not listed on the public stock exchange, but is privately owned. 75 per cent of FC Bayern München AG is owned by the club, the FC Bayern München e. V. ( e. V. is short for eingetragener Verein , which translates into \"registered association\"). Three German corporations, the sports goods manufacturer Adidas , the automobile company Audi and the financial services group Allianz each hold 8.33 per cent of the shares, 25 per cent in total. Adidas acquired its shares in 2002 for €77 million. The money was designated to help finance the Allianz Arena . In 2009, Audi paid €90 million for their share. The capital was used to repay the loan on the Allianz Arena. And in early 2014, Allianz became the third shareholder of the company acquiring theirs share for €110 million. With the sale, Bayern paid off the remaining debt on the Allianz Arena 16 years ahead of schedule. Bayern's other sports departments are run by the club. [ citation needed ]\n\nBayern's shirt sponsor is Deutsche Telekom . Deutsche Telekom has been Bayern's shirt sponsor since the start of 2002–03 season. The company extended their sponsorship deal in August 2015 until the end of the 2026–27 season. Previous kit sponsors were Adidas (1974–78), Magirus Deutz and Iveco (1978–84), Commodore (1984–89) and Opel (1989–2002). Bayern's kit manufacturer is Adidas, who have been Bayern's kit manufacturer since 1974. The deal with Adidas runs until the end of the 2029–30 season. \n\nBayern is an exception in professional football, having generated profits for 27 consecutive years. Other clubs often report losses, realising transfers via loans, whereas Bayern always uses current assets . In the 2019 edition of the Deloitte Football Money League , Bayern had the fourth-highest revenue in club football, generating revenue of €629.2 million. Bayern had the second-highest commercial revenue in the 2019 Deloitte Football Money League, behind only Real Madrid. Bayern's commercial revenue was €348.7 million (55 per cent of total revenue). In contrast, Bayern's matchday revenue trails other top clubs at €103.8 million (17 per cent of their total revenue). In 2017, Forbes ranks Bayern as the world's fourth-most valuable football club in their annual list , estimating the club's value at €2.5 billion. \n\nWhile other European clubs have mainly marketed to international audiences, Bayern had focused on Germany. Since the 2010s, Bayern have started to focus their marketing more on Asia and the United States . Bayern made summer tours to the United States in 2014 and 2016. [ citation needed ] Bayern went to China in the summer of 2015 and returned in the summer of 2017, where they also played games in Singapore . In August 2014, Bayern opened an office in New York City as the club wants to strengthen their brand positioning against other top European clubs in the United States. In March 2017, Bayern opened an office in Shanghai , China. \n\nBayern has been involved with charitable ventures for a long time, helping other football clubs in financial disarray as well as ordinary people in misery. In the wake of the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami the \"FC Bayern – Hilfe e. V.\" was founded, a foundation that aims to concentrate the social engagements of the club. At its inception, this venture was funded with €600,000, raised by officials and players of the club. The money was, amongst other things, used to build a school in Marathenkerny, Sri Lanka , and to rebuild the area of Trincomalee , Sri Lanka. \n\nThe club has also assisted other sport clubs in financial disarray. The club has supported its local rival 1860 Munich with player transfers at favourable rates and direct money transfers. When St. Pauli threatened to lose its licence for professional football due to financial problems, [ when? ] Bayern met the club for a friendly game, giving all gate receipts to St. Pauli. In 1993, Alexander Zickler transferred from Dynamo Dresden to Bayern for 2.3 Million DM , with many considering the sum to have been a subvention for the financially threatened Dresdeners. In 2003, Bayern provided a €2 Million loan to the nearly bankrupt Borussia Dortmund . In 2009, Mark van Bommel 's home club Fortuna Sittard was in financial distress; Bayern played a charity game at the Dutch club, gifting them gate receipts. In 2013, Bayern played a charity game against financially threatened third division side Hansa Rostock . The game raised about €1 million, securing Hansa's licence. In 2017, Bayern played a benefit match against financial troubled Kickers Offenbach , with all gate receipts going to Kickers Offenbach. Two years later, Bayern played a benefit match against Kaiserslautern. The match was played so Kaiserslautern could secure their licence to play in the German third division. All income from the match went to Kaiserslautern. In March 2020, Bayern, Borussia Dortmund, RB Leipzig and Bayer Leverkusen, the four German UEFA Champions League teams for the 2019–20 season, collectively gave €20 million to Bundesliga and 2. Bundesliga teams that were struggling financially during the COVID-19 pandemic . \n\nIn mid-2013, Bayern was the first club to give financial support to the Magnus Hirschfeld National Foundation . The foundation researches the living environment LGBT people, and developed an education concept to facilitate unbiased dealing with LGBT themes in football. In 2016, Bayern received the Nine Values Cup, an award of the international children's social programme Football for Friendship . \n\nBayern Munich headquarters and training facility is called Säbener Straße and it is located in the Untergiesing-Harlaching borough of Munich. The first team and the reserve team train at the facility. There are five grass pitches, two of which have undersoil heating, two artificial grass fields, a beach volleyball court and a multi-functional sports hall. \n\nIn August 2017, the club's sports complex , FC Bayern Campus , opened at a cost of €70 million. The campus is located north of Munich at Ingolstädter Straße . The campus is 30 hectare and has eight football pitches for youth teams from the U-9s to the U-19s and the women's and girls' teams. The campus also has a 2,500-capacity stadium where the U-17s and the U-19s play their matches. The Allianz Bayern Akademie is located on the campus site, and the academy has 35 apartments for young talents who do not live in the Greater Munich area. The academy building also has offices for youth coaches and staff. \n\nBayern is historically the most successful team in German football, as they have won the most championships and the most cups . They are also Germany's most successful team in international competitions, having won fourteen trophies. Bayern is the only club to have won all three major European competitions , to have won three consecutive European Cups and to have won the treble twice, one of which was part of the larger, and more elusive, \" sextuple \" (2020).\n\nSource: \n\nBayern Munich has completed all available Trebles (seasonal treble, domestic treble and European treble). \n\nDuring each calendar year, Bayern Munich only have six trophies available to them. A sextuple consists of going \"six for six\" in those competitions, which Bayern accomplished in 2020. This rare feat consists of winning the Continental treble in one season, followed by winning each of the three additional competitions, to which the treble gives a club access in the following season.\n\nNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules ; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.\n\nThe following players have been called-up to Bayern Munich squad for any official competition match, and some have officially debuted. They are those who have been promoted from the reserve team squad and the youth sector squads also, with whom they regularly play for. The listed numbers are those being officially assigned to players who are taking part during the current season .\n\nNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules ; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.\n\nNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules ; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.\n\nThe \"Greatest Ever\" squad chosen by more than 79,901 fans, in 2005. The coach chosen was Ottmar Hitzfeld . \n\nAt his farewell game, Oliver Kahn was declared honorary captain of Bayern Munich. The players below are part of the Bayern Munich Hall of Fame . \n\n1930s\n\n1970s:\n\n1980s:\n\n1990s:\n\n2000s:\n\n2010s:\n\nBayern has had 20 coaches since its promotion to the Bundesliga in 1965. Udo Lattek , Giovanni Trapattoni and Ottmar Hitzfeld served two terms as head coach. Franz Beckenbauer served one term as head coach and one as caretaker, while Jupp Heynckes had four separate spells as coach, including one as caretaker. Lattek was the club's most successful coach, having won six Bundesliga titles, two DFB Cups and the European Cup; following closely is Ottmar Hitzfeld, who won five Bundesliga titles, two DFB Cups and the Champions League. The club's least successful coach was Søren Lerby , who won less than a third of his matches in charge and presided over the club's near-relegation in the 1991–92 campaign. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe reserve team, FC Bayern Munich II , serves mainly as the final stepping stone for promising young players before being promoted to the main team. The team competes in the Regionalliga Bayern , the fourth level of German football . Their greatest achievement to date was winning the 3. Liga in the 2019–20 season. Since the inception of the Regionalliga in 1994, the team played in the Regionalliga Süd , after playing in the Oberliga since 1978. In the 2007–08 season, they qualified for the newly founded 3. Liga, where they lasted until 2011 when they were relegated to the Regionalliga. This ended 33 consecutive years of playing in the highest league that the German Football Association permits the second team of a professional football team to play. \n\nThe youth academy has produced some of Europe's top football players, including Thomas Hitzlsperger , Owen Hargreaves , Philipp Lahm , Bastian Schweinsteiger and Thomas Müller . On 1 August 2017, the FC Bayern Campus became the new home of the youth teams. It consists of ten teams, with the youngest being under 9. Jochen Sauer is the FC Bayern Campus director, and Bayern legend coach Hermann Gerland is the sporting director. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe women's football department consists of five teams, including a professional team, a reserve team, and two youth teams. The women's first team , which is led by head coach Thomas Wörle , features several members of the German national youth team. In the 2008–09 season, the team finished second in the women's Bundesliga . The division was founded in 1970 and consisted of four teams with 90 players. Their greatest successes were winning the championships in 1976, 2015, and 2016. In the 2011–12 season on 12 May 2012, FC Bayern Munich dethroned the German Cup title holders 1. FFC Frankfurt with a 2–0 in the 2011–12 final in Cologne and celebrated the biggest success of the club's history since winning the championship in 1976. In 2015, they won the Bundesliga for the first time, without any defeat. They won the 2015–16 Bundesliga for the second consecutive time. \n\nThe senior football department was founded in 2002 and consists of five teams. The division is intended to enable senior athletes to participate in the various senior citizen competitions in Munich. The FC Bayern AllStars were founded in summer 2006, and consists of former Bayern players, including Klaus Augenthaler , Raimond Aumann , Andreas Brehme , Paul Breitner , Hans Pflügler , Stefan Reuter , Paulo Sérgio , and Olaf Thon . The team is coached by Wolfgang Dremmler , and plays matches with other senior teams around the world. For organisational reasons, the team can only play a limited number of games annually. The refereeing department was established in 1919 and is currently the largest football refereeing division in Europe, with 110 referees, with 2 of them women. The referees mainly officiate amateur games in the local Munich leagues. \n\nBayern has other departments for a variety of sports. \n\nThe basketball department was founded in 1946, and currently [ when? ] contains 26 teams, including four men's teams, three women's teams, sixteen youth teams, and three senior teams. The men's team are five-time German champions , having won in 1954, 1955, 2014 , 2018 , and 2019 . The team also won the German Basketball Cup in 1968, 2018 , and 2021 . The team plays its home games at the Rudi-Sedlmayer-Halle , located in the Sendling-Westpark borough of Munich. \n\nThe bowling department emerged from SKC Real-Isaria in 1983 and currently consists of five teams. Directly next to the well-known club building of the football department, the team plays at the bowling alley of the Münchner Kegler-Verein. The first team plays in the second highest division of the Münchner Spielklasse Bezirksliga. \n\nThe chess department was created in 1908 and consists of nine teams, including seven men's teams and two women's teams. The men's team, which currently plays in the Chess Bundesliga following promotion in 2013 from the 2. Bundesliga Ost, was nine-time German Champion from 1983 to 1995. The team also won the European Chess Club Cup in 1992. The women currently play in the 2. Bundesliga with their biggest successes being promotion to the Frauenbundesliga in 2016 and 2018. \n\nThe handball department was founded in 1945, and consists of thirteen teams, including three men's teams, two women's teams, five boys teams, two girls teams, and a mixed youth team. The first men's team plays in the Bezirksoberliga Oberbayern, while the women's first teams plays in the Bezirksliga Oberbayern. \n\nThe table tennis department was founded in 1946 and currently [ when? ] has 220 members. The club currently has fourteen teams, including eight men's teams, a women's team, three youth teams, and two children teams. The women's first team is currently playing in the Landesliga Süd/Ost, while the men's first team plays in the 3. Bundesliga Süd. The focus of the department is on youth support. \n\n48°6′7″N 11°34′22″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.10194°N 11.57278°E ﻿ / 48.10194; 11.57278",
  "Fome Zero ( Portuguese pronunciation: [ˈfomi ˈzɛɾu] , Zero Hunger ) is a program of the Government of Brazil introduced by President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in 2003, with the goal to eradicate hunger and extreme poverty in the country. It followed the lead of projects that had already put into practice by the Fernando Henrique Cardoso administration, which was named Bolsa Escola (School Stipend), and which had been established in 1995.\n\nLula followed the lead of projects that had already put into practice by the Fernando Henrique Cardoso administration, which was named Bolsa Escola (School Stipend), and which had been established in 1995. Lula expanded those projects with the new Fome Zero (\"Zero Hunger\") program, which was part of the Bolsa Família (Family Allowance) plan. \n\nThe program is co-ordinated by the Ministry of Social Development and Hunger Combat ( Ministério do Desenvolvimento Social e Combate à Fome ) and was intended to put into action the government's strategy to guarantee the right of access to basic food. The program takes a number of forms, ranging from direct financial aid to the poorest families (with the Bolsa Família card) to diverse strategies such as creating water cisterns in Brazil's semi-arid areas, creating low-cost restaurants, educating people about healthy eating habits, distributing vitamins and iron supplements, supporting subsistence family farming and giving access to microcredit .\n\nThe program is believed to have contributed to Brazil's recent reported improvements in its fight against poverty, according to research promoted by some universities and the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE). An ex ante econometric evaluation of Bolsa Escola did find significant effects on both school attendance rates and the number of children involved in child labor . \n\nThe World Bank , which created in June 2005 a Bolsa Família Project to assist the Brazilian government in managing the Bolsa Família Program, declared that \"Although the program is relatively young, some results are already apparent, including: (...) contributions to improved education outcomes, and impacts on children’s growth, food consumption, and diet quality\". \n\nA study by the UNDP Poverty Centre found that over 80% of the Bolsa Familia benefits went to families in poverty (making under half the minimum wage per capita), thus most of the benefits were going to the poor. BF was also claimed to have been responsible for about 20% of the drop in inequality in Brazil since 2001, which is welcome in one of the most unequal countries on the planet. Research promoted by the World Bank showed a significant reduction in child labor exploitation among children benefited by the Bolsa Família program. \n\nThe program has also been reported to have made a significant impact on the ability of the poorest families to eat. Children in public school receive one free meal a day—two in the poorest areas—and so less of their family's limited income is needed to pay for food. In a survey of Bolsa Familia recipients, 82.4% reported eating better; additionally, it was reported to increase the incomes of the poorer families by about 25%. \n\nIn 2003, David de Ferranti , the World Bank IBRD representative for Latin America and the Caribbean, criticized the program, due to its lack of clear focus, saying the program did not combat the country's poverty and income inequality. He also criticised the mechanisms for money donation and food gathering and distribution.\n\nFive months after Lula took office, the budget for Fome Zero was cut down a third from its original amount, and one year later, about $800 million was budgeted toward the program, but only $130 million of that was actually disbursed. \n\nFome Zero was considered by the opposition at the time (especially the PSDB and DEM parties) a failure, due to what they believed was the government's inability to manage the program effectively. Murilo Zauith, a PFL federal deputy, in March 2005, said the program was faulty, citing as an example the death of several indigenous children due to malnutrition in the city of Dourados, Mato Grosso do Sul . However, Humberto Costa, the Minister of Health at the time, considered the death count average and not alarming. \n\nAnother early criticism was that the program turned mostly into a money-transfer program, subject to corruption, and did not completely solve the problem. Data from 2014 to 2015 showed that malnutrition is still a problem in Brazil and responsible by 4.3 deaths per 100,000 people per year, linked to the fact that 3.8% of the population (7.6 million people) still earns less than US$1 a day. However, this was down from 7.6 deaths per 100k in 2002 and fell further to 2.4 by 2021. ",
  "The Anthony Awards are literary awards for mystery writers presented at the Bouchercon World Mystery Convention since 1986. The awards are named for Anthony Boucher (1911–1968), one of the founders of the Mystery Writers of America . \n\nAwards are voted for by members attending the annual event and are given in a number of categories, including\n\nThe ceremony may also include a number of \"wild card\" awards. [ citation needed ]",
  "Livraria Bertrand is a Portuguese book retailer operating 59 branches nationwide, including 2 in Madeira . Founded in 1732, its original store in the Chiado neighborhood of Lisbon was declared to be the oldest operating bookstore in the world by the Guinness Book of World Records in 2011. Bertrand has been frequented by numerous famous authors, including Alexandre Herculano , Fernando Pessoa , Eça de Queirós , Antero de Quental , Ramalho Ortigão , and the fictional protagonists of Antonio Tabucchi 's short masterpiece \"The Backwards Game\".\n\nThe history of the book and bookstores in Portugal is inseparable from that of the French . From the eighteenth century, there was the arrival of a large number of French booksellers to Portugal, including Pedro Faure, who went on to found what we know today as \"Livraria Bertrand\". Lisbon then had the presence of several compatriots of Pedro Faure, who were developing activities in the same industry, it seems, creating a tradition of printers and booksellers of French origin in Portugal. Pedro Faure, who already in 1727 was a leading printed shop in Cordoaria Velha , opened a bookstore in 1732, probably with his name on Rua Direita do Loreto, close to the current Livraria Bertrand do Chiado.\n\nIn 1742, a new associate would be Pierre Bertrand, a newcomer to Lisbon coming from the Alpine region of Le Monêtier-les-Bains. The property was designated \"Pedro Faure & Bertrand,\" and in the meantime, to ensure the succession, Pedro Faure married his daughter to Pierre Bertrand. A few years passed before one of Pierre Bertrand's brother, Jean Joseph, reached Lisbon and joined the company. The bookstore thus came to be called \"Peter Faure & Bertrand Brothers\". On the death of Peter Faure, in 11, 1753, the Bertrand brothers were business tycoons, redesignating the venture as \"Irmãos Bertrand (Bertrand Brothers)\". The business was doing well, but the 1755 earthquake eventually devastate the bookstore. This incident endangered the business, which was to be abandoned by Pierre but Jean Joseph Bertrand, more persistent, did not give up. Facing the pressure they were forced to find another location, and settled in the Capela de Nossa Senhora das Necessidades in a place called \"Senhor Jesus da Boa Morte\".\n\nHowever, eighteen years later, in 1773, he returned to the rebuilt Lisbon Baixa (Pombaline Lower Town area), leading to the rebirth of the Livraria Bertrand in Rua Garrett, where it remains until the present day. With the death of Jean Joseph, his wife Marie Claire Rey Bertrand and his son took over the bookstore destinations . The widow, an active woman who always helped in the management of the company, led the family business, invariably dressed in black silk. The firm now assumed the circumspect name \"Bertrand's Widow and Son.\" In 1791, the library's catalog included 169 titles, but if sought, many other books were available in the store, not counting those who could order in various parts of the kingdom or from foreign countries. With the death of Marie Claire Rey Bertrand, her son George Bertrand succeeded, who having neither the talent nor his father's health, would die before turning 40. So with his disappearance, another widow would ascend to lead the fate of the firm in the early 1800s: Marianna Borel Bertrand.\n\nLater, in the nineteenth century, three of the children of George and Marianna Borel Bertrand – John Joseph, Andrew and Francis Xavier – take charge of the bookstore and future publishing business. Close friends of Alexandre Herculano edited almost all of his work. Later in the twentieth century, the company evolved, changed owners several times and was endowed with, consequently, different legal personalities. In 1912, ownership of the \"Livraria Bertrand\" was with the firm 'Aillaud Bastos & Alves' editors in Paris, Lisbon and Rio de Janeiro. In 1938, it opened the first bookstore in Porto and, from 1939, Livraria Bertrand had its own printing press. In 1942, the French bookseller Didier Marcel acquired the majority stake in Bertrand and was under its umbrella – and the management of the French George Lucas (1948–1975) as an administrator-delegate – the firm saw its maximum development and apogee, becoming the largest distributor of foreign books and journals, opening bookstores nationwide and elevating the issue to a remarkable level.\n\nIn 1963, it opened a second store in Lisbon, in Avenida de Roma. This photograph dates from 1965, the year of the advertising campaign on \"The Book and the War\", whose posters can be seen in the window. This campaign, aimed to promote reading, celebrating both the end of the twentieth anniversary of World War II. The pioneering library always remained open in Chiado, providing a wide range of all types of books along its six successive halls. After the death of Marcel Didier, in 1969, Georges Lucas promoted the sale of his position to Portuguese financier Manuel Bullosa. nothing has changed in conducting business, keeping the same managing director and the same enterprise policy. In 1993, Manuel Bullosa sold Bertrand to a financial company represented by José Sotomayor Matoso.\n\nIn 2006 it was bought by DirectGroup Bertelsmann , owner of the Círculo de Leitores.\n\nIn 2010 the publishing group Porto Editora acquired Livraria Bertrand, and the remaining business units that Direct Group held in Portugal, namely Bertrand Editora and Distribuidora de Livros Bertrand. In April 2010, the Livraria Bertrand won the Guinness World Record for \"the oldest booksellers continuing in activity\", having won for the Bertrand Chiado bookshop, the Guinness World Record for \"the oldest bookstore in activity. Bookstore Bertrand is thus the name of a network with 53 bookstores across Portugal, and formally integrates the Porto Editora Group since June 30, 2010.\n\n1732 – Pedro Faure opens the first bookstore on the corner of Rua Direita do Loreto and Rua do Norte in Lisbon. The bookstore probably carried his name.\n\n1747 – Pedro Faure includes the brothers Bertrand - Pierre and Jean Joseph Bertrand in the operations. The bookstore gets called \"Pedro Faure & Irmãos Bertrand\" (\"Pedro Faure & the Bertrand Brothers\").\n\n1753 – Pedro Faure dies. The bookstore gets called \"Bertrand Brothers\".\n\n1773 – After the earthquake of 1755, the Library reappears in Rua Garrett.\n\n1909 – Bertrand deploys its own workshops for printing and composition, located at 100, Rua da Alegria, and takes on the name of \"Tipografia da Antiga Casa Bertrand\".\n\n1938 – A partnership agreement is signed between the Livraria Bertrand and the International Library of Porto (Livraria Internacional do Porto, headquartered at 43–46, Rua 31 de Janeiro), which marks the beginning of the network.\n\n1963 – Livraria Bertrand opens a second store in Lisbon, at Avenida de Roma.\n\n2006 – The Círculo de Leitores acquires the Bertrand Group, comprising Editora Bertrand, Distribuidora de Livros Bertrand and Livrarias Bertrand.\n\n2007 – The integration of Bertrand Group and Círculo de Leitores Group under the common brand of DirectGroup Portugal.\n\n2008 – Direct Group Portugal acquires Editora Pergaminho and strengthens its position in Portuguese publishing.\n\n2010 – The Groupo Porto Editora acquires the Direct Group, constituted by Editora Bertrand, Distribuidora Bertrand, Livrarias Bertrand and Círculo de Leitores. With this acquisition, the BertrandCírculo Group gets formed.\n\nManuela D. Domingos, Livreiros de Setecentos, Biblioteca Nacional Portugal, 2000\n\nJornal Público, Livraria Bertrand do Chiado a preferida de Lisboa\n\n RTP, Livraria Bertrand é a mais antiga do mundo\n\nLivraria Bertrand é a mais antiga",
  "A prokaryote ( / p r oʊ ˈ k ær i oʊ t , - ə t / ; less commonly spelled procaryote ) is a single-celled organism whose cell lacks a nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles . The word prokaryote comes from the Ancient Greek πρό ( pró ), meaning 'before', and κάρυον ( káruon ), meaning 'nut' or 'kernel'. In the earlier two-empire system arising from the work of Édouard Chatton , prokaryotes were classified within the empire Prokaryota . However, in the three-domain system , based upon molecular phylogenetics , prokaryotes are divided into two domains : Bacteria and Archaea . A third domain, Eukaryota , consists of organisms with nuclei.\n\nProkaryotes evolved before eukaryotes, and lack nuclei, mitochondria , and most of the other distinct organelles that characterize the eukaryotic cell. Some unicellular prokaryotes, such as cyanobacteria , form colonies held together by biofilms , and large colonies can create multilayered microbial mats . Prokaryotes are asexual , reproducing via binary fission. Horizontal gene transfer is common as well.\n\nMolecular phylogenetics has provided insight into the evolution and interrelationships of the three domains of life. The division between prokaryotes and eukaryotes reflects two very different levels of cellular organization; only eukaryotic cells have an enclosed nucleus that contains its DNA , and other membrane-bound organelles including mitochondria. More recently, the primary division has been seen as that between Archaea and Bacteria, since eukaryotes may be part of the archaean clade and have multiple homologies with other Archaea.\n\nProkaryotic cells are generally smaller and similar than eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotic cells do not enclose their genetic material within a nucleus. Bacteria are an example of prokaryotes.\n\nThe cellular components of prokaryotes are not enclosed in membranes within the cytoplasm , like eukaryotic organelles. Bacteria have microcompartments , quasi-organelles enclosed in protein shells such as encapsulin protein cages , while both bacteria and some archaea have gas vesicles . \n\nProkaryotes have simple cell skeletons . These are highly diverse, and contain homologues of the eukaryote proteins actin and tubulin . The cytoskeleton provides the capability for movement within the cell. \n\nMost prokaryotes are between 1 and 10 μm, but they vary in size from 0.2 μm in Thermodiscus spp. and Mycoplasma genitalium to 750 μm in Thiomargarita namibiensis . \n\nBacterial cells have various shapes , including spherical or ovoid cocci , e.g., Streptococcus ; cylindrical bacilli , e.g., Lactobacillus ; spiral bacteria , e.g., Helicobacter ; or comma-shaped, e.g., Vibrio . Archaea are mainly simple ovoids, but Haloquadratum is flat and square. \n\nBacteria and archaea reproduce through asexual reproduction , usually by binary fission . Genetic exchange and recombination occur by horizontal gene transfer , not involving replication . DNA transfer between prokaryotic cells occurs in bacteria and archaea. \n\nIn bacteria, gene transfer occurs by three processes. These are virus-mediated transduction ; conjugation ; and natural transformation . \n\nTransduction of bacterial genes by bacteriophage viruses appears to reflect occasional errors during intracellular assembly of virus particles, rather than an adaptation of the host bacteria. There are at least three ways that it can occur, all involving the incorporation of some bacterial DNA in the virus, and from there to another bacterium. \n\nConjugation involves plasmids , allowing plasmid DNA to be transferred from one bacterium to another. Infrequently, a plasmid may integrate into the host bacterial chromosome, and subsequently transfer part of the host bacterial DNA to another bacterium. \n\nNatural bacterial transformation involves the transfer of DNA from one bacterium to another through the water around them. This is a bacterial adaptation for DNA transfer, because it depends on the interaction of numerous bacterial gene products. \n\nThe bacterium must first enter the physiological state called competence ; in Bacillus subtilis , the process involves 40 genes. The amount of DNA transferred during transformation can be as much as a third of the whole chromosome. Transformation is common, occurring in at least 67 species of bacteria. \n\nAmong archaea, Haloferax volcanii forms cytoplasmic bridges between cells that transfer DNA between cells, while Sulfolobus solfataricus transfers DNA between cells by direct contact. Exposure of S. solfataricus to agents that damage DNA induces cellular aggregation, perhaps enhancing homologous recombination to increase the repair of damaged DNA . \n\nProkaryotes are strictly unicellular , but most can form stable aggregate communities in biofilms . Bacterial biofilms are formed by the secretion of extracellular polymeric substance (EPS). Myxobacteria have multicellular stages in their life cycles . Biofilms may be structurally complex and may attach to solid surfaces, or exist at liquid-air interfaces. Bacterial biofilms are often made up of microcolonies (dome-shaped masses of bacteria and matrix) separated by channels through which water may flow easily.\n\nMicrocolonies may join together above the substratum to form a continuous layer. This structure functions as a simple circulatory system by moving water through the biofilm, helping to provide cells with oxygen which is often in short supply. The result approaches a multicellular organisation. Differential cell expression, collective behavior, signaling ( quorum sensing ), programmed cell death , and discrete biological dispersal events all seem to point in this direction. Bacterial biofilms may be 100 times more resistant to antibiotics than free-living unicells, making them difficult to remove from surfaces they have colonized. \n\nProkaryotes have diversified greatly throughout their long existence. Their metabolism is far more varied than that of eukaryotes, leading to many highly distinct types. For example, prokaryotes may obtain energy by chemosynthesis . Prokaryotes live nearly everywhere on Earth, including in environments as cold as soils in Antarctica , or as hot as undersea hydrothermal vents and land-based hot springs . Some bacteria are pathogenic , causing disease in organisms including humans. Some archaea and bacteria are extremophiles , thriving in harsh conditions, such as high temperatures ( thermophiles ) or high salinity ( halophiles ). Some archaeans are methanogens , living in anoxic environments and releasing methane . Many archaea grow as plankton in the oceans. Symbiotic prokaryotes live in or on the bodies of other organisms, including humans. Prokaryotes have high populations in the soil , in the sea, and in undersea sediments. Soil prokaryotes are still heavily undercharacterized despite their easy proximity to humans and their tremendous economic importance to agriculture . \n\nA widespread model of the origin of life is that the first organisms were prokaryotes. These evolved out of protocells , while the eukaryotes evolved later in the history of life, by symbiogenesis : a merger of two prokaryotes, an archaean and an aerobic bacterium, created the first eukaryote, with aerobic mitochondria . A second merger added chloroplasts , from a photosynthetic cyanobacterium , creating the green plants . \n\nThe oldest fossilized prokaryotes were laid down approximately 3.5 billion years ago, only about 1 billion years after the formation of the Earth's crust. Eukaryotes only appear in the fossil record later. The oldest fossil eukaryotes are about 1.7 billion years old. \n\nThe distinction between prokaryotes and eukaryotes was established by the microbiologists Roger Stanier and C. B. van Niel in their 1962 paper The concept of a bacterium (though spelled procaryote and eucaryote there). That paper cites Édouard Chatton 's 1937 book Titres et Travaux Scientifiques for using those terms and recognizing the distinction. One reason for this classification was so that the group then often called blue-green algae (now cyanobacteria ) would not be classified as plants but grouped with bacteria. \n\nIn 1977, Carl Woese proposed dividing prokaryotes into the Bacteria and Archaea (originally Eubacteria and Archaebacteria) because of the major differences in the structure and genetics between the two groups of organisms. Archaea were originally thought to be extremophiles, living only in inhospitable conditions such as extremes of temperature , pH , and radiation but have since been found in all types of habitats . The resulting arrangement of Eukaryota (also called \"Eucarya\"), Bacteria, and Archaea is called the three-domain system , replacing the traditional two-empire system . \n\nKnowledge of prokaryote taxonomy is rapidly changing in the 21st century with the sequencing of large numbers of genomes, many of these without the isolation of cultures of the organisms involved. As of 2021, consensus had not been reached among taxonomists to rely exclusively on genomes as opposed to existing practices, describing species from cultures. \n\nAccording to the 2016 phylogenetic analysis of Laura Hug and colleagues, using genomic data on over 1,000 organisms, the relationships among prokaryotes are as shown in the tree diagram. Bacteria dominate the diversity of organisms, shown at left, top, and right in the diagram; the archaea are shown bottom centre, and the eukaryotes in the small green area at bottom right. As represented by red dots on the diagram, there are multiple major lineages where no representative has been isolated: such lineages are common in both bacteria (such as Omnitrophica and Wirthbacteria ) and archaea (such as Parvarchaeota and Lokiarchaeota ). At the lower levels (species to class) and up to the level of phylum, the data provide strong support for the groupings, but the deepest (oldest) branches of the phylogeny are more uncertain. \n\nThe large diversity of bacterial lineages shown in purple on the right of the diagram. These represent the so-called \"candidate phyla radiation of bacteria\", namely those with a combination of small genomes and reduced metabolic capabilities: none of them have been found to be able to carry out the whole of the citric acid cycle by which many cells release usable energy , and few can synthesise amino acids and nucleotides , building blocks of proteins and nucleic acids . This may represent an ancient condition, or a loss of capabilities of symbiotic organisms. \n\nThe division between prokaryotes and eukaryotes has been considered the most important distinction or difference among organisms. The distinction is that eukaryotic cells have a \"true\" nucleus containing their DNA , whereas prokaryotic cells do not have a nucleus. Eukaryotic cells are some 10,000 times larger than prokaryotic cells by volume, and contain membrane-bound organelles . \n\nBoth eukaryotes and prokaryotes contain ribosomes which produce proteins as specified by the cell's DNA. Prokaryote ribosomes are smaller than those in eukaryote cytoplasm, but similar to those inside mitochondria and chloroplasts , one of several lines of evidence that those organelles derive from bacteria incorporated by symbiogenesis . \n\nThe genome in a prokaryote is held within a DNA/protein complex in the cytosol called the nucleoid , which lacks a nuclear envelope . The complex contains a single circular chromosome , a cyclic, double-stranded molecule of stable chromosomal DNA, in contrast to the multiple linear, compact, highly organized chromosomes found in eukaryotic cells. In addition, many important genes of prokaryotes are stored in separate circular DNA structures called plasmids. Like eukaryotes, prokaryotes may partially duplicate genetic material, and can have a haploid chromosomal composition that is partially replicated . \n\nProkaryotes lack mitochondria and chloroplasts. Instead, processes such as oxidative phosphorylation and photosynthesis take place across the prokaryotic cell membrane. Prokaryotes possess some internal structures, such as prokaryotic cytoskeletons . It was previously suggested that the bacterial phylum Planctomycetota has a membrane around the nucleoid and contains other membrane-bound cellular structures. Further investigation revealed that Planctomycetota cells are not compartmentalized or nucleated and, like other bacterial membrane systems, are interconnected. \n\nProkaryotic cells are usually much smaller than eukaryotic cells. This causes prokaryotes to have a larger surface-area-to-volume ratio , giving them a higher metabolic rate , a higher growth rate, and as a consequence, a shorter generation time than eukaryotes. \n\nThere is increasing evidence that the roots of the eukaryotes are to be found in the archaean Asgard group, perhaps Heimdallarchaeota . For example, histones , which usually package DNA in eukaryotic nuclei, are found in several archaean groups, giving evidence for homology. A proposed non-bacterial group comprising Archaea and Eukaryota was called Neomura by Thomas Cavalier-Smith in 2002. \n\nAnother view is that the most important difference between biota may be the division between Bacteria and the rest (Archaea and Eukaryota). DNA replication differs fundamentally between the Bacteria and Archaea (including that in eukaryotic nuclei), and it may not be homologous between these two groups. \n\nFurther, ATP synthase , though homologous in all organisms, differs greatly between bacteria (including eukaryotic organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts) and the archaea/eukaryote nucleus group. The last common ancestor of all life (called LUCA ) should have possessed an early version of this protein complex. As ATP synthase is obligate membrane bound, this supports the assumption that LUCA was a cellular organism. The RNA world hypothesis might clarify this scenario, as LUCA might have lacked DNA, but had an RNA genome built by ribosomes as suggested by Woese . \n\nA ribonucleoprotein world has been proposed based on the idea that oligopeptides may have been built together with primordial nucleic acids at the same time, which supports the concept of a ribocyte as LUCA. The feature of DNA as the material base of the genome might have then been adopted separately in bacteria and in archaea (and later eukaryote nuclei), presumably with the help of some viruses (possibly retroviruses as they could reverse transcribe RNA to DNA). \n\nThis article incorporates public domain material from Science Primer . NCBI . Archived from the original on 2009-12-08.",
  "Narrative poetry is a form of poetry that tells a story, often using the voices of both a narrator and characters; the entire story is usually written in metered verse. Narrative poems do not need to rhyme. The poems that make up this genre may be short or long, and the story it relates to may be complex. It is normally dramatic, with various characters. Narrative poems include all epic poetry , and the various types of \"lay\", most ballads , and some idylls , as well as many poems not falling into a distinct type.\n\nSome narrative poetry takes the form of a novel in verse . An example of this is The Ring and the Book by Robert Browning . In terms of narrative poetry, romance is a narrative poem that tells a story of chivalry . Examples include the Romance of the Rose or Tennyson 's Idylls of the King . Although those examples use medieval and Arthurian materials, romances may also tell stories from classical mythology . Sometimes, these short narratives are collected into interrelated groups, as with Chaucer 's The Canterbury Tales . So sagas include both incidental poetry and the biographies of poets.\n\nThe oral tradition is the predecessor of essentially all other modern forms of communication. For thousands of years, cultures passed on their history through oral tradition from generation to generation. Historically, much of poetry has its source in an oral tradition: in more recent times the Scots and English ballads , the tales of Robin Hood poems all were originally intended for recitation , rather than reading. In many cultures, there remains a lively tradition of the recitation of traditional tales in verse format. It has been suggested that some of the distinctive features that distinguish poetry from prose , such as metre , alliteration , and kennings , at one time served as memory aids that allowed the bards who recited traditional tales to reconstruct them from memory . \n\nA narrative poem usually tells a story using a poetic theme. Epics are very vital to narrative poems, although it is thought those narrative poems were created to explain oral traditions. The focus of narrative poetry is often the pros and cons of life.\n\nAll epic poems , verse romances and verse novels can also be thought of as extended narrative poems. Other notable examples of narrative poems include:",
  "Neue Slowenische Kunst ( German: [ˈnɔʏə sloˈveːnɪʃə ˈkʊnst] ; NSK ; German for 'New Slovenian Art') is a political art collective that formed in Slovenia in 1984, when the Socialist Republic of Slovenia was part of Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . NSK's name was chosen to reflect the theme in its works of the complicated relationship Slovenes have had with Germans . The name of NSK's music wing, Laibach , is also the German name of the Slovene capital Ljubljana . The name created controversy because some felt it evoked memories of the Nazi annexation of Slovenia during the Second World War . It also refers to Slovenia's previous seven centuries as part of the Habsburg monarchy . \n\nNSK was founded by the musical group Laibach . Other NSK members include groups such as IRWIN (visual art), Scipion Nasice Sisters Theatre (also known as Red Pilot and Cosmokinetic Theatre Noordung), New Collective Studio (graphics; also known as New Collectivism), Retrovision (film and video), and the Department of Pure and Applied Philosophy (theory). The founding groups of the NSK were Laibach, IRWIN, and Scipion Nasice Sisters Theater. Membership has traditionally been open to all artistic groups who show an interest in challenging the norms and taboos of Slovene national identity. \n\nNSK art often draws on symbols from totalitarian or extreme nationalist movements, often appropriating totalitarian kitsch in a visual style reminiscent of Dada . NSK artists often juxtapose symbols from different (and often incompatible) political ideologies. For example, a 1987 NSK-designed poster caused a scandal by winning a competition for the Yugoslavian Youth Day Celebration. The poster appropriated a painting by Nazi artist Richard Klein , replacing the flag of Nazi Germany with the Yugoslav flag and the German eagle with a dove. Intended as an ironic joke, the painting soon fell foul of the authorities, who interpreted it as equating Marshal Josip Broz Tito with Adolf Hitler . It was later reproduced on the cover of Mladina magazine, and that particular issue was subsequently banned. \n\nThe NSK was the subject of a 1996 documentary film entitled Predictions of Fire ( Prerokbe Ognja ), which was written and directed by Michael Benson . Among those interviewed is Slovenian intellectual Slavoj Žižek .\n\nSince 1991, the NSK has claimed to be a sovereign state of sorts. As such, displays of its members' work are performed under the guise of an embassy, or a territory of the supposed state. Since 1994, the NSK has maintained consulates in several cities, including Umag , Croatia . It has also issued passports and postage stamps. NSK passports are considered an art project. As such, they are not valid for travel. Laibach's 2006 album Volk , which consisted of songs based on national albums, included a national anthem of NSK, an arrangement of the Laibach song \"The Great Seal\". In 2010, the first NSK Citizens Congress was held in Berlin. It was followed by a \"NSK Rendez-Vous\" in Lyon, France, where Alexei Monroe revealed NSK's aim : to make people \"aware that totalitarianism isn't a discrete historical phenomenon which went on from 1933 to 1989 and then it's over so let's have a nice triumph of liberal democracy\". On 26 February 2011, another \"NSK Rendez-Vous\" took place in London. In 2012, yet another \"NSK Rendez-Vous\" was set to take place in New York City 's Museum of Modern Art . 2017 saw NSK set up a pavilion at the Venice Biennale where Slavoj Žižek stated that \"the uniqueness of NSK is this idea of the 'stateless state'. ",
  "Short-track speed skating is a form of competitive ice speed skating . In competitions, multiple skaters (typically between four and six) skate on an oval ice track with a length of 111.111 metres (364.54 ft). The rink itself is 60 metres (196.85 ft) long by 30 metres (98.43 ft) wide, which is the same size as an Olympic-sized figure skating rink and an international-sized ice hockey rink . Related sports include long-track speed skating and inline speed skating .\n\nShort-track skating developed from speed skating events that were held with mass starts. This form of speed skating was mainly practised in the United States and Canada , as opposed to the international form (derived from Europe ), where athletes skated in pairs. At the 1932 Winter Olympics , speed skating events were conducted in the mass start form. Competitions in North America tended to be held indoors, for example in Madison Square Garden , New York, and therefore on shorter tracks than was usual for outdoor skating.\n\nIn 1967, the International Skating Union (ISU) adopted short-track speed skating, although it did not organize international competitions until 1976. World Championships in short-track speed skating have been officially held since 1981, although events held in 1976–1980 under different names have since received the status of World Championships retrospectively. The name of the competition was changed several times before it was eventually titled the \" World Short Track Speed Skating Championships \" in 1989; the championships are now held annually.\n\nShort-track speed skating was introduced as a demonstration sport at the 1988 Winter Olympics in Calgary , Canada. It was upgraded to a full Olympic sport in 1992 and has been part of the Winter Olympics ever since. There were only four short-track events in the 1992 Winter Games , but the program was expanded to include six events in 1994 and 1998 , and finally eight events in the 2002 Winter Games . The events are the same for both men and women: 500 meters, 1000 meters, 1500 meters, plus the relay event (5000 meters for men, 3000 meters for women). Since the 2018–19 World Cup season, a 2000-meter mixed-team relay was added, and debuted in the 2022 Winter Olympics . A 3,000-meter super-final event is included in the European Championships , but this is not currently part of the Olympic short-track program.\n\nSkaters who commit one of the following offenses risk immediate disqualification from a race and having their times rendered invalid and being suspended from playing for a short time. \n\nIn relay races, each team has four skaters, who can take turns freely by tagging. A skater may be relayed at any time except during the last two laps. Usually, the outgoing skater pushes the incoming skater to help the teammate to gain speed. If a team member falls, the next person needs to be tagged. A relay team would be penalized if they committed the following:\n\nThe following is the list of athletes who are Individual gold medalist at the Olympic Winter Games or Overall World Champion and have won Olympic Winter Games or Overall World Championships at least three times.",
  "We Live In Public is a 2009 documentary film by Ondi Timoner about Internet pioneer Josh Harris , indirectly highlighting the loss of privacy in the Internet age .\n\nThe film details the experiences of Josh Harris , a dot-com millionaire who founded Pseudo.com , and who became interested in human experiments testing the effects of media and technology on the development of personal identity . To that end, Harris created the art project \"Quiet: We Live in Public\", which placed more than one hundred artists in a human terrarium under New York City, with a myriad of webcams following and capturing their every move. Each pod was outfitted by artist Jeff Gompertz with cameras and screens to allow every occupant to monitor every other pod. Following that project, Harris outfitted a loft with 30 surveillance cameras and 66 microphones, broadcasting online his own life with his new girlfriend for a planned 100 days, \"becoming the rat in his own experiment\". She left and the couple broke up after 81 days. \n\nThe film includes commentary from Internet personalities Chris DeWolfe , Jason Calacanis , Douglas Rushkoff , and venture capitalist Fred Wilson , as well as artists and producers involved in the \"Quiet: We Live in Public\" event such as V. Owen Bush , Jeff Gompertz , Leo Fernekes, Feedbuck, Leo Koenig, Gabriella Latessa, Alex Arcadia, Zeroboy, and Alfredo Martinez . \n\nWe Live in Public was screened six times at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival before being awarded the Grand Jury Prize in the U.S. documentary category. Timoner is the first director in the Sundance Film Festival's history to twice win the Grand Jury Prize for Documentary, having won in 2004 with Dig! . We Live in Public was runner-up for Best Documentary at the 2009 Karlovy Vary International Film Festival. \n\nOn Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an 81% approval rating, based on 52 reviews. The critics consensus says, \"This documentary about Josh Harris' surveillance-as-art project exposes the problems of privacy in the internet age and asks provocative questions about the power of ego in a place where everything is on display.\" Roger Ebert gave the film four stars, his highest rating, and wrote, \"This is a remarkable film about a strange and prophetic man.\" ",
  "The University of Florence ( Italian : Università degli Studi di Firenze ) (in acronym UNIFI) is an Italian public research university located in Florence, Italy . It comprises 12 schools and has around 50,000 students enrolled.\n\nThe first university in Florence was the Studio Fiorentino [ it ] which was established by the Florentine Republic in 1321. The Studium was recognized by Pope Clement VI in 1349, and authorized to grant regular degrees . The Pope also established that the first Italian faculty of theology would be in Florence . The Studium became an imperial university in 1364, but was moved to Pisa in 1473 when Lorenzo the Magnificent gained control of Florence. Charles VIII moved it back from 1497 to 1515, but it was moved to Pisa again when the Medici family returned to power.\n\nThe modern university dates from 1859, when a group of disparate higher-studies institutions grouped together in the Istituto di Studi Pratici e di Perfezionamento, which a year later was recognized as a full-fledged university by the government of newly unified Italy. In 1923, the Istituto was officially denominated as University by the Italian Parliament .\n\nThe university is subdivided into 12 schools, which are: Agriculture; Architecture ; Arts; Economics; Education; Engineering; Law; Mathematics, Physics and Natural Sciences ; Medicine and Surgery; Pharmacology ; Political Science ; and Psychology .\n\nFaculties are located in traditionally strategic areas based on their subject matter. The Faculty of Economics, Faculty of Law and the Faculty of Political Sciences are in the Polo delle Scienze Sociali (campus of social sciences), in the Novoli district, near the new courthouse. The Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, the Faculty of Pharmacology, and certain scientific and engineering departments are in the Careggi district, close to the hospital. The Faculty of Engineering is located at the S. Marta Institute, whereas the Faculty of Agriculture is in front of the Parco delle Cascine . The Faculty of Mathematical, Physical and Natural Sciences is located in Sesto Fiorentino . The Faculty of Architecture is in the center of the city, as the Accademia di Belle Arti , home of Michelangelo 's David . The Faculties of Literature, History, Philosophy, and Pedagogy are in the centre of Florence .\n\nThe University hosts one of the leading Italian law schools, repeatedly recognised as a national \"Department of Excellence\" by the Italian Ministry of Education, University, and Research . Alumni and faculty members of the University of Florence School of Law have held leading positions in government. They include Presidents of the Italian Constitutional Court Silvana Sciarra , Paolo Grossi , Ugo de Siervo, and Enzo Cheli, President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Jugoslavia and Special Tribunal for Lebanon Antonio Cassese , Judge of the International Court of Justice Giorgio Gaja , Judge of the Court of Justice of the European Union Roberto Mastroianni, former Prime Ministers of the Italian Republic Matteo Renzi and Giuseppe Conte , and members of the Constituent Assembly Piero Calamandrei and Giorgio La Pira .\n\nNotable alumni of the University of Florence include:\n\n43°46′40″N 11°15′31″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.77778°N 11.25861°E ﻿ / 43.77778; 11.25861",
  "A seamount is a large submarine landform that rises from the ocean floor without reaching the water surface ( sea level ), and thus is not an island , islet , or cliff -rock. Seamounts are typically formed from extinct volcanoes that rise abruptly and are usually found rising from the seafloor to 1,000–4,000 m (3,300–13,100 ft) in height. They are defined by oceanographers as independent features that rise to at least 1,000 m (3,281 ft) above the seafloor, characteristically of conical form. The peaks are often found hundreds to thousands of meters below the surface, and are therefore considered to be within the deep sea . During their evolution over geologic time, the largest seamounts may reach the sea surface where wave action erodes the summit to form a flat surface. After they have subsided and sunk below the sea surface, such flat-top seamounts are called \" guyots \" or \"tablemounts\". \n\nEarth's oceans contain more than 14,500 identified seamounts, of which 9,951 seamounts and 283 guyots, covering a total area of 8,796,150 km 2 (3,396,210 sq mi), have been mapped but only a few have been studied in detail by scientists. Seamounts and guyots are most abundant in the North Pacific Ocean, and follow a distinctive evolutionary pattern of eruption, build-up, subsidence and erosion. In recent years, several active seamounts have been observed, for example Kamaʻehuakanaloa (formerly Lōʻihi) in the Hawaiian Islands .\n\nBecause of their abundance, seamounts are one of the most common marine ecosystems in the world. Interactions between seamounts and underwater currents, as well as their elevated position in the water, attract plankton , corals , fish, and marine mammals alike. Their aggregational effect has been noted by the commercial fishing industry , and many seamounts support extensive fisheries. There are ongoing concerns on the negative impact of fishing on seamount ecosystems, and well-documented cases of stock decline, for example with the orange roughy ( Hoplostethus atlanticus ). 95% of ecological damage is done by bottom trawling , which scrapes whole ecosystems off seamounts.\n\nBecause of their large numbers, many seamounts remain to be properly studied, and even mapped. Bathymetry and satellite altimetry are two technologies working to close the gap. There have been instances where naval vessels have collided with uncharted seamounts; for example, Muirfield Seamount is named after the ship that struck it in 1973. However, the greatest danger from seamounts are flank collapses; as they get older, extrusions seeping in the seamounts put pressure on their sides, causing landslides that have the potential to generate massive tsunamis .\n\nSeamounts can be found in every ocean basin in the world, distributed extremely widely both in space and in age. A seamount is technically defined as an isolated rise in elevation of 1,000 m (3,281 ft) or more from the surrounding seafloor, and with a limited summit area, of conical form. There are more than 14,500 seamounts. In addition to seamounts, there are more than 80,000 small knolls , ridges and hills less than 1,000 m in height in the world's oceans. \n\nMost seamounts are volcanic in origin, and thus tend to be found on oceanic crust near mid-ocean ridges , mantle plumes , and island arcs . Overall, seamount and guyot coverage is greatest as a proportion of seafloor area in the North Pacific Ocean, equal to 4.39% of that ocean region. The Arctic Ocean has only 16 seamounts and no guyots, and the Mediterranean and Black seas together have only 23 seamounts and 2 guyots. The 9,951 seamounts which have been mapped cover an area of 8,088,550 km 2 (3,123,010 sq mi). Seamounts have an average area of 790 km 2 (310 sq mi), with the smallest seamounts found in the Arctic Ocean and the Mediterranean and Black Seas; whilst the largest mean seamount size, 890 km 2 (340 sq mi), occurs in the Indian Ocean . The largest seamount has an area of 15,500 km 2 (6,000 sq mi) and it occurs in the North Pacific. Guyots cover a total area of 707,600 km 2 (273,200 sq mi) and have an average area of 2,500 km 2 (970 sq mi), more than twice the average size of seamounts. Nearly 50% of guyot area and 42% of the number of guyots occur in the North Pacific Ocean, covering 342,070 km 2 (132,070 sq mi). The largest three guyots are all in the North Pacific: the Kuko Guyot (estimated 24,600 km 2 (9,500 sq mi)), Suiko Guyot (estimated 20,220 km 2 (7,810 sq mi)) and the Pallada Guyot (estimated 13,680 km 2 (5,280 sq mi)). \n\nSeamounts are often found in groupings or submerged archipelagos , a classic example being the Emperor Seamounts , an extension of the Hawaiian Islands . Formed millions of years ago by volcanism , they have since subsided far below sea level. This long chain of islands and seamounts extends thousands of kilometers northwest from the island of Hawaii .\n\nThere are more seamounts in the Pacific Ocean than in the Atlantic, and their distribution can be described as comprising several elongate chains of seamounts superimposed on a more or less random background distribution. Seamount chains occur in all three major ocean basins, with the Pacific having the most number and most extensive seamount chains. These include the Hawaiian (Emperor), Mariana, Gilbert, Tuomotu and Austral Seamounts (and island groups) in the north Pacific and the Louisville and Sala y Gomez ridges in the southern Pacific Ocean. In the North Atlantic Ocean, the New England Seamounts extend from the eastern coast of the United States to the mid-ocean ridge. Craig and Sandwell noted that clusters of larger Atlantic seamounts tend to be associated with other evidence of hotspot activity, such as on the Walvis Ridge , Vitória-Trindade Ridge , Bermuda Islands and Cape Verde Islands . The mid-Atlantic ridge and spreading ridges in the Indian Ocean are also associated with abundant seamounts. Otherwise, seamounts tend not to form distinctive chains in the Indian and Southern Oceans, but rather their distribution appears to be more or less random.\n\nIsolated seamounts and those without clear volcanic origins are less common; examples include Bollons Seamount , Eratosthenes Seamount , Axial Seamount and Gorringe Ridge . \n\nIf all known seamounts were collected into one area, they would make a landform the size of Europe . Their overall abundance makes them one of the most common, and least understood, marine structures and biomes on Earth, a sort of exploratory frontier. \n\nMost seamounts are built by one of two volcanic processes, although some, such as the Christmas Island Seamount Province near Australia, are more enigmatic. Volcanoes near plate boundaries and mid-ocean ridges are built by decompression melting of rock in the upper mantle . The lower density magma rises through the crust to the surface. Volcanoes formed near or above subducting zones are created because the subducting tectonic plate adds volatiles to the overriding plate that lowers its melting point . Which of these two process involved in the formation of a seamount has a profound effect on its eruptive materials. Lava flows from mid-ocean ridge and plate boundary seamounts are mostly basaltic (both tholeiitic and alkalic ), whereas flows from subducting ridge volcanoes are mostly calc-alkaline lavas. Compared to mid-ocean ridge seamounts, subduction zone seamounts generally have more sodium , alkali , and volatile abundances, and less magnesium , resulting in more explosive, viscous eruptions. \n\nAll volcanic seamounts follow a particular pattern of growth, activity, subsidence and eventual extinction. The first stage of a seamount's evolution is its early activity, building its flanks and core up from the sea floor. This is followed by a period of intense volcanism, during which the new volcano erupts almost all (e.g. 98%) of its total magmatic volume. The seamount may even grow above sea level to become an oceanic island (for example, the 2009 eruption of Hunga Tonga ). After a period of explosive activity near the ocean surface , the eruptions slowly die away. With eruptions becoming infrequent and the seamount losing its ability to maintain itself, the volcano starts to erode . After finally becoming extinct (possibly after a brief rejuvenated period), they are ground back down by the waves. Seamounts are built in a far more dynamic oceanic setting than their land counterparts, resulting in horizontal subsidence as the seamount moves with the tectonic plate towards a subduction zone . Here it is subducted under the plate margin and ultimately destroyed, but it may leave evidence of its passage by carving an indentation into the opposing wall of the subduction trench. The majority of seamounts have already completed their eruptive cycle, so access to early flows by researchers is limited by late volcanic activity. \n\nOcean-ridge volcanoes in particular have been observed to follow a certain pattern in terms of eruptive activity, first observed with Hawaiian seamounts but now shown to be the process followed by all seamounts of the ocean-ridge type. During the first stage the volcano erupts basalt of various types, caused by various degrees of mantle melting . In the second, most active stage of its life, ocean-ridge volcanoes erupt tholeiitic to mildly alkalic basalt as a result of a larger area melting in the mantle. This is finally capped by alkalic flows late in its eruptive history, as the link between the seamount and its source of volcanism is cut by crustal movement. Some seamounts also experience a brief \"rejuvenated\" period after a hiatus of 1.5 to 10 million years, the flows of which are highly alkalic and produce many xenoliths . \n\nIn recent years, geologists have confirmed that a number of seamounts are active undersea volcanoes; two examples are Kamaʻehuakanaloa (formerly Lo‘ihi) in the Hawaiian Islands and Vailulu'u in the Manu'a Group ( Samoa ). \n\nThe most apparent lava flows at a seamount are the eruptive flows that cover their flanks, however igneous intrusions , in the forms of dikes and sills , are also an important part of seamount growth. The most common type of flow is pillow lava , named so after its distinctive shape. Less common are sheet flows, which are glassy and marginal, and indicative of larger-scale flows. Volcaniclastic sedimentary rocks dominate shallow-water seamounts. They are the products of the explosive activity of seamounts that are near the water's surface, and can also form from mechanical wear of existing volcanic rock. \n\nSeamounts can form in a wide variety of tectonic settings, resulting in a very diverse structural bank. Seamounts come in a wide variety of structural shapes, from conical to flat-topped to complexly shaped. Some are built very large and very low, such as Koko Guyot and Detroit Seamount ; others are built more steeply, such as Kamaʻehuakanaloa Seamount and Bowie Seamount . Some seamounts also have a carbonate or sediment cap . \n\nMany seamounts show signs of intrusive activity , which is likely to lead to inflation , steepening of volcanic slopes, and ultimately, flank collapse. There are also several sub-classes of seamounts. The first are guyots , seamounts with a flat top. These tops must be 200 m (656 ft) or more below the surface of the sea; the diameters of these flat summits can be over 10 km (6.2 mi). Knolls are isolated elevation spikes measuring less than 1,000 meters (3,281 ft). [ clarification needed ] Lastly, pinnacles are small pillar-like seamounts. \n\nSeamounts are exceptionally important to their biome ecologically, but their role in their environment is poorly understood. Because they project out above the surrounding sea floor, they disturb standard water flow, causing eddies and associated hydrological phenomena that ultimately result in water movement in an otherwise still ocean bottom. Currents have been measured at up to 0.9 knots, or 48 centimeters per second. Because of this upwelling seamounts often carry above-average plankton populations, seamounts are thus centers where the fish that feed on them aggregate, in turn falling prey to further predation, making seamounts important biological hotspots. \n\nSeamounts provide habitats and spawning grounds for these larger animals, including numerous fish. Some species, including black oreo (Allocyttus niger) and blackstripe cardinalfish (Apogon nigrofasciatus) , have been shown to occur more often on seamounts than anywhere else on the ocean floor. Marine mammals , sharks , tuna , and cephalopods all congregate over seamounts to feed, as well as some species of seabirds when the features are particularly shallow. \n\nSeamounts often project upwards into shallower zones more hospitable to sea life, providing habitats for marine species that are not found on or around the surrounding deeper ocean bottom. Because seamounts are isolated from each other they form \"undersea islands\" creating the same biogeographical interest. As they are formed from volcanic rock , the substrate is much harder than the surrounding sedimentary deep sea floor. This causes a different type of fauna to exist than on the seafloor, and leads to a theoretically higher degree of endemism . However, recent research especially centered at Davidson Seamount suggests that seamounts may not be especially endemic, and discussions are ongoing on the effect of seamounts on endemicity. They have , however, been confidently shown to provide a habitat to species that have difficulty surviving elsewhere. \n\nThe volcanic rocks on the slopes of seamounts are heavily populated by suspension feeders , particularly corals , which capitalize on the strong currents around the seamount to supply them with food. These coral are therefore host to numerous other organisms in a commensal relationship , for example brittle stars , who climb the coral to get themselves off the seafloor, helping them to catch food particles, or small zooplankton, as they drift by. This is in sharp contrast with the typical deep-sea habitat, where deposit-feeding animals rely on food they get off the ground. In tropical zones extensive coral growth results in the formation of coral atolls late in the seamount's life. \n\nIn addition soft sediments tend to accumulate on seamounts, which are typically populated by polychaetes ( annelid marine worms ) oligochaetes ( microdrile worms), and gastropod mollusks ( sea slugs ). Xenophyophores have also been found. They tend to gather small particulates and thus form beds, which alters sediment deposition and creates a habitat for smaller animals. Many seamounts also have hydrothermal vent communities, for example Suiyo and Kamaʻehuakanaloa seamounts. This is helped by geochemical exchange between the seamounts and the ocean water. \n\nSeamounts may thus be vital stopping points for some migratory animals , specifically whales . Some recent research indicates whales may use such features as navigational aids throughout their migration. For a long time it has been surmised that many pelagic animals visit seamounts as well, to gather food, but proof of this aggregating effect has been lacking. The first demonstration of this conjecture was published in 2008. \n\nThe effect that seamounts have on fish populations has not gone unnoticed by the commercial fishing industry . Seamounts were first extensively fished in the second half of the 20th century, due to poor management practices and increased fishing pressure seriously depleting stock numbers on the typical fishing ground, the continental shelf . Seamounts have been the site of targeted fishing since that time. \n\nNearly 80 species of fish and shellfish are commercially harvested from seamounts, including spiny lobster (Palinuridae), mackerel (Scombridae and others), red king crab ( Paralithodes camtschaticus ), red snapper ( Lutjanus campechanus ), tuna (Scombridae), Orange roughy ( Hoplostethus atlanticus ), and perch (Percidae). \n\nThe ecological conservation of seamounts is hurt by the simple lack of information available. Seamounts are very poorly studied, with only 350 of the estimated 100,000 seamounts in the world having received sampling, and fewer than 100 in depth. Much of this lack of information can be attributed to a lack of technology, [ clarification needed ] and to the daunting task of reaching these underwater structures; the technology to fully explore them has only been around the last few decades. Before consistent conservation efforts can begin, the seamounts of the world must first be mapped , a task that is still in progress. \n\nOverfishing is a serious threat to seamount ecological welfare. There are several well-documented cases of fishery exploitation, for example the orange roughy ( Hoplostethus atlanticus ) off the coasts of Australia and New Zealand and the pelagic armorhead ( Pseudopentaceros richardsoni ) near Japan and Russia. The reason for this is that the fishes that are targeted over seamounts are typically long-lived, slow-growing, and slow-maturing. The problem is confounded by the dangers of trawling , which damages seamount surface communities, and the fact that many seamounts are located in international waters, making proper monitoring difficult. Bottom trawling in particular is extremely devastating to seamount ecology, and is responsible for as much as 95% of ecological damage to seamounts. \n\nCorals from seamounts are also vulnerable, as they are highly valued for making jewellery and decorative objects. Significant harvests have been produced from seamounts, often leaving coral beds depleted. \n\nIndividual nations are beginning to note the effect of fishing on seamounts, and the European Commission has agreed to fund the OASIS project, a detailed study of the effects of fishing on seamount communities in the North Atlantic . Another project working towards conservation is CenSeam , a Census of Marine Life project formed in 2005. CenSeam is intended to provide the framework needed to prioritise, integrate, expand and facilitate seamount research efforts in order to significantly reduce the unknown and build towards a global understanding of seamount ecosystems, and the roles they have in the biogeography , biodiversity , productivity and evolution of marine organisms. \n\nPossibly the best ecologically studied seamount in the world is Davidson Seamount , with six major expeditions recording over 60,000 species observations. The contrast between the seamount and the surrounding area was well-marked. One of the primary ecological havens on the seamount is its deep sea coral garden, and many of the specimens noted were over a century old. Following the expansion of knowledge on the seamount there was extensive support to make it a marine sanctuary , a motion that was granted in 2008 as part of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary . Much of what is known about seamounts ecologically is based on observations from Davidson. Another such seamount is Bowie Seamount , which has also been declared a marine protected area by Canada for its ecological richness. \n\nThe study of seamounts has been hindered for a long time by the lack of technology. Although seamounts have been sampled as far back as the 19th century, their depth and position meant that the technology to explore and sample seamounts in sufficient detail did not exist until the last few decades. Even with the right technology available, [ clarification needed ] only a scant 1% of the total number have been explored, and sampling and information remains biased towards the top 500 m (1,640 ft). New species are observed or collected and valuable information is obtained on almost every submersible dive at seamounts. \n\nBefore seamounts and their oceanographic impact can be fully understood, they must be mapped, a daunting task due to their sheer number. The most detailed seamount mappings are provided by multibeam echosounding ( sonar ), however after more than 5000 publicly held cruises, the amount of the sea floor that has been mapped remains minuscule. Satellite altimetry is a broader alternative, albeit not as detailed, with 13,000 catalogued seamounts; however this is still only a fraction of the total 100,000. The reason for this is that uncertainties in the technology limit recognition to features 1,500 m (4,921 ft) or larger. In the future, technological advances could allow for a larger and more detailed catalogue. \n\nObservations from CryoSat-2 combined with data from other satellites has shown thousands of previously uncharted seamounts, with more to come as data is interpreted. \n\nSeamounts are a possible future source of economically important metals. Even though the ocean makes up 70% of Earth's surface area, technological challenges have severely limited the extent of deep sea mining . But with the constantly decreasing supply on land, some mining specialists see oceanic mining as the destined future, and seamounts stand out as candidates. \n\nSeamounts are abundant, and all have metal resource potential because of various enrichment processes during the seamount's life. An example for epithermal gold mineralization on the seafloor is Conical Seamount, located about 8 km south of Lihir Island in Papua New Guinea. Conical Seamount has a basal diameter of about 2.8 km and rises about 600 m above the seafloor to a water depth of 1050 m. Grab samples from its summit contain the highest gold concentrations yet reported from the modern seafloor (max. 230 g/t Au, avg. 26 g/t, n=40). Iron - manganese , hydrothermal iron oxide , sulfide , sulfate , sulfur , hydrothermal manganese oxide , and phosphorite (the latter especially in parts of Micronesia) are all mineral resources that are deposited upon or within seamounts. However, only the first two have any potential of being targeted by mining in the next few decades. \n\nSome seamounts have not been mapped and thus pose a navigational danger. For instance, Muirfield Seamount is named after the ship that hit it in 1973. More recently, the submarine USS San Francisco ran into an uncharted seamount in 2005 at a speed of 35 knots (40.3 mph; 64.8 km/h), sustaining serious damage and killing one seaman. \n\nOne major seamount risk is that often, in the late of stages of their life, extrusions begin to seep in the seamount. This activity leads to inflation, over-extension of the volcano's flanks, and ultimately flank collapse , leading to submarine landslides with the potential to start major tsunamis , which can be among the largest natural disasters in the world. In an illustration of the potent power of flank collapses, a summit collapse on the northern edge of Vlinder Seamount resulted in a pronounced headwall scarp and a field of debris up to 6 km (4 mi) away. A catastrophic collapse at Detroit Seamount flattened its whole structure extensively. Lastly, in 2004, scientists found marine fossils 61 m (200 ft) up the flank of Kohala mountain in Hawaii . Subsidation analysis found that at the time of their deposition, this would have been 500 m (1,640 ft) up the flank of the volcano, far too high for a normal wave to reach. The date corresponded with a massive flank collapse at the nearby Mauna Loa , and it was theorized that it was a massive tsunami, generated by the landslide, that deposited the fossils. \n\nGeology\n\nEcology\n\nGeography and geology\n\nEcology",
  "In the Holy Roman Empire , the collective term free and imperial cities (German: Freie und Reichsstädte ), briefly worded free imperial city ( Freie Reichsstadt , Latin : urbs imperialis libera ), was used from the 15th century to denote a self-ruling city that had a certain amount of autonomy and was represented in the Imperial Diet . \n\nAn imperial city held the status of imperial immediacy , and was subordinate only to the Holy Roman Emperor , as opposed to a territorial city or town ( Landstadt ), which was subordinate to a territorial prince – be it an ecclesiastical lord ( prince-bishop , prince-abbot ), or a secular prince ( duke ( Herzog ), margrave , count ( Graf ), etc.).\n\nThe evolution of some German cities into self-ruling constitutional entities of the Empire was slower than that of the secular and ecclesiastical princes. In the course of the 13th and 14th centuries, some cities were promoted by the emperor to the status of Imperial Cities ( Reichsstädte ; Urbes imperiales ), essentially for fiscal reasons. Those cities, which had been founded by the German kings and emperors in the 10th through 13th centuries and had initially been administered by royal/imperial stewards ( Vögte ), gradually gained independence as their city magistrates assumed the duties of administration and justice; some prominent examples are Colmar , Haguenau , and Mulhouse in Alsace or Memmingen and Ravensburg in upper Swabia . [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Free Cities ( Freie Städte ; Urbes liberae ) were those, such as Basel , Augsburg , Cologne or Strasbourg , that were initially subjected to a prince-bishop and, likewise, progressively gained independence from that lord. In a few cases, such as in Cologne, the former ecclesiastical lord continued to claim the right to exercise some residual feudal privileges over the Free City, a claim that gave rise to constant litigation almost until the end of the Empire.\n\nOver time, the difference between Imperial Cities and Free Cities became increasingly blurred, so that they became collectively known as \"Free Imperial Cities\", or \"Free and Imperial Cities\", and by the late 15th century, many cities included both \"Free\" and \"Imperial\" in their name. Like the other Imperial Estates, they could wage war, make peace, and control their own trade, and they permitted little interference from outside. In the later Middle Ages, a number of Free Cities formed City Leagues ( Städtebünde ), such as the Hanseatic League or the Alsatian Décapole , to promote and defend their interests.\n\nIn the course of the Middle Ages, cities gained, and sometimes – if rarely – lost, their freedom through the vicissitudes of power politics. Some favored cities gained charters by gift. Others purchased one from a prince in need of funds. Some won it by force of arms during the troubled 13th and 14th centuries and others lost their privileges during the same period by the same way. Some cities became free through the void created by the extinction of dominant families, like the Swabian Hohenstaufen . Some voluntarily placed themselves under the protection of a territorial ruler and therefore lost their independence.\n\nA few, like Protestant Donauwörth , which in 1607 was annexed to the Catholic Duchy of Bavaria , were stripped by the Emperor of their status as a Free City – for genuine or trumped-up reasons. This rarely happened after the Reformation, and of the sixty Free Imperial Cities that remained at the Peace of Westphalia , all but the ten Alsatian cities which were annexed by France during the late 17th century continued to exist until the mediatization of 1803.\n\nThe Empire had approximately 4000 towns and cities, although fewer than 400 of these had more than a thousand inhabitants around the year 1600. During the Late Middle Ages, fewer than 200 of these places ever enjoyed the status of Free Imperial Cities, and some of those did so only for a few decades. The Imperial military tax register ( Reichsmatrikel ) of 1521 listed eighty-five such cities, and this figure had fallen to 65 by the time of the Peace of Augsburg in 1555. From the Peace of Westphalia of 1648 to 1803, their number oscillated at around 50. [ notes 1 ]\n\nUnlike the Free Imperial Cities, the second category of towns and cities, now called \"territorial cities\", [ notes 2 ] were subject to an ecclesiastical or lay lord, and while many of them enjoyed self-government to varying degrees, this was a precarious privilege which might be curtailed or abolished according to the will of the lord. \n\nReflecting the complex constitutional set-up of the Holy Roman Empire, a third category, composed of semi-autonomous cities that belonged to neither of those two types, is distinguished by some historians. These were cities whose size and economic strength was sufficient to sustain a substantial independence from surrounding territorial lords for a considerable time, even though no formal right to independence existed. These cities were typically located in small territories where the ruler was weak. [ notes 3 ] They were the exception among the multitude of territorial towns and cities. Cities of both latter categories normally had representation in territorial diets , but not in the Imperial Diet. \n\nFree imperial cities were not officially admitted as individual Imperial Estates to the Imperial Diet until 1489, and even then their votes were usually considered only advisory ( votum consultativum ) compared to the benches of the electors and princes. The cities divided themselves into two groups, or benches, in the Imperial Diet, the Rhenish and the Swabian benches. [ notes 4 ]\n\nThese same cities were among the 85 free imperial cities listed on the Reichsmatrikel of 1521, the imperial civil and military tax-schedule used for more than a century to assess the contributions of all the Imperial Estates in case of a war formally declared by the Imperial Diet. The military and monetary contribution of each city is indicated in parentheses. For instance Cologne (30-322-600) means that Cologne had to provide 30 horsemen, 322 footsoldiers and 600 gulden . \n\nThese numbers are equivalent to one simplum . If need be, the Diet could vote a second and a third simplum , in which case each member's contribution was doubled or tripled. At the time, the free imperial cities were considered wealthy and the monetary contribution of Nuremberg, Ulm and Cologne for instance were as high as that of the Electors ( Mainz , Trier , Cologne , Palatinate , Saxony , Brandenburg ) and the Dukes of Württemberg and of Lorraine . [ citation needed ]\n\nThe following list contains the 50 free imperial cities that took part in the Imperial Diet of 1792. They are listed according to their voting order on the Rhenish and Swabian benches. \n\nBy the time of the Peace of Westphalia, the cities constituted a formal third \"college\" and their full vote ( votum decisivum ) was confirmed, although they failed to secure parity of representation with the two other colleges. To avoid the possibility that they would have the casting vote in case of a tie between the Electors and the Princes, it was decided that these should decide first and consult the cities afterward. \n\nDespite this somewhat unequal status of the cities in the functioning of the Imperial Diet, their full admittance to that federal institution was crucial in clarifying their hitherto uncertain status and in legitimizing their permanent existence as full-fledged Imperial Estates. Constitutionally, if in no other way, the diminutive Free Imperial City of Isny was the equal of the Margraviate of Brandenburg .\n\nHaving probably learned from experience that there was not much to gain from active, and costly, participation in the Imperial Diet's proceedings due to the lack of empathy of the princes, the cities made little use of their representation in that body. By about 1700, almost all the cities with the exception of Nuremberg, Ulm and Regensburg, where by then the Perpetual Imperial Diet was located, were represented by various Regensburg lawyers and officials who often represented several cities simultaneously. Instead, many cities found it more profitable to maintain agents at the Aulic Council in Vienna, where the risk of an adverse judgment posed a greater risk to city treasuries and independence. \n\nThe territory of most Free Imperial Cities was generally quite small but there were exceptions. The largest territories formed in what is now Switzerland with cities like Bern, Zürich and Luzern, but also cities like Ulm, Nuremberg and Hamburg in what is now Germany possessed substantial hinterlands or fiefs that comprised dozens of villages and thousands of subject peasants who did not enjoy the same rights as the urban population. At the opposite end, the authority of Cologne, Aachen, Worms, Goslar, Wetzlar, Augsburg and Regensburg barely extended beyond the city walls.\n\nThe constitution of Free and Imperial Cities was republican in form, but in all but the smallest cities, the city government was oligarchic in nature [ citation needed ] with a governing town council composed of an elite, hereditary patrician class, [ citation needed ] the so-called town council families ( Ratsverwandte ). They were the most economically significant burgher families who had asserted themselves politically over time.\n\nBelow them, with a say in the government of the city, were the citizens or burghers, the smaller, privileged section of the city's permanent population whose number varied according to the rule of citizenship of each city. There were exceptions, such as Nuremberg , where the patriciate ruled alone. To the common town dweller – whether he lived in a prestigious Free Imperial City like Frankfurt, Augsburg or Nuremberg, or in a small market town such as there were hundreds throughout Germany – attaining burgher status ( Bürgerrecht ) could be his greatest aim in life.\n\nThe burgher status was usually an inherited privilege renewed pro-forma in each generation of the family concerned but it could also be purchased. At times, the sale of burgher status could be a significant item of town income as fiscal records show. The Bürgerrecht was local and not transferable to another city.\n\nThe burghers were usually the lowest social group to have political power and privilege within the Holy Roman Empire. Below them was the disenfranchised urban population, maybe half of the total in many cities, the so-called \"residents\" ( Beisassen ) or \"guests\": smaller artisans, craftsmen, street venders, day laborers, servants and the poor, and those whose residence in the city was temporary, such as wintering noblemen, foreign merchants, princely officials, and so on. \n\nUrban conflicts in Free Imperial Cities, which sometimes amounted to class warfare, were not uncommon in the Early Modern Age, particularly in the 17th century (Lübeck, 1598–1669; Schwäbisch Hall, 1601–1604; Frankfurt, 1612–1614; Wezlar, 1612–1615; Erfurt, 1648–1664; Cologne, 1680–1685; Hamburg 1678–1693, 1702–1708). Sometimes, as in the case of Hamburg in 1708, the situation was considered sufficiently serious to warrant the dispatch of an Imperial commissioner with troops to restore order and negotiate a compromise and a new city constitution between the warring parties. \n\nThe number of Imperial Cities shrank over time until the Peace of Westphalia. There were more in areas that were very fragmented politically, such as Swabia and Franconia in the southwest, than in the North and the East where the larger and more powerful territories, such as Brandenburg and Saxony, were located, which were more prone to absorb smaller, weaker states.\n\nIn the 16th and 17th century, a number of Imperial Cities were separated from the Empire due to external territorial change. Henry II of France seized the Imperial Cities connected to the Three Bishoprics of Metz , Verdun and Toul . Louis XIV seized many cities based on claims produced by his Chambers of Reunion . That way, Strasbourg and the ten cities of the Décapole were annexed. When the Old Swiss Confederacy gained its formal independence from the Empire in 1648, it had been de facto independent since 1499, the independence of the Imperial Cities of Basel , Bern , Lucerne , St. Gallen , Schaffhausen , Solothurn , and Zürich was formally recognized.\n\nWith the rise of Revolutionary France in Europe, this trend accelerated enormously. After 1795, the areas west of the Rhine were annexed to France by the revolutionary armies, suppressing the independence of Imperial Cities as diverse as Cologne, Aachen, Speyer and Worms. Then, the Napoleonic Wars led to the reorganization of the Empire in 1803 (see German Mediatisation ), where all of the free cities but six – Hamburg , Bremen , Lübeck , Frankfurt, Augsburg , and Nuremberg – lost their independence and were absorbed into neighboring territories.\n\nUnder pressure from Napoleon, the Holy Roman Empire was dissolved in 1806. By 1811, all of the Imperial Cities had lost their independence – Augsburg and Nuremberg had been annexed by Bavaria , Frankfurt had become the center of the Grand Duchy of Frankfurt , a Napoleonic puppet state , and the three Hanseatic cities had been directly annexed by France as part of its effort to enforce the Continental Blockade against Britain. Hamburg and Lübeck with surrounding territories formed the département of Bouches-de-l'Elbe , and Bremen the Bouches-du-Weser .\n\nWhen the German Confederation was established by the Congress of Vienna in 1815, Hamburg, Lübeck, Bremen, and Frankfurt were once again made Free Cities, this time enjoying total sovereignty as all the members of the loose Confederation. Frankfurt was annexed by Prussia in consequence of the part it took in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866. The three other Free Cities became constituent states of the new German Empire in 1871 and consequently were no longer fully sovereign as they lost control over defence, foreign affairs and a few other fields.\n\nThey retained that status in the Weimar Republic and into Nazi Germany , although under Hitler it became purely notional. Due to Hitler's distaste for Lübeck and its liberal tradition, the need was devised to compensate Prussia for territorial losses under the Greater Hamburg Act , and Lübeck was annexed to Prussia in 1937. In the Federal Republic of Germany which was established after the war, Bremen and Hamburg, but not Lübeck, became constituent states , a status which they retain to the present day. Berlin , which had never been a Free City in its history, received the status of a state after the war due to its special position in divided post-war Germany.\n\nRegensburg was, apart from hosting the Imperial Diet , a most peculiar city: an officially Lutheran city that was the seat of the Catholic prince-bishopric of Regensburg, its prince-bishop and cathedral chapter. The Imperial City also housed three Imperial abbeys: St. Emmeram , Niedermünster and Obermünster . They were five immediate entities fully independent of each other existing in the same small city.",
  "Alders are trees of the genus Alnus in the birch family Betulaceae . The genus includes about 35 species of monoecious trees and shrubs , a few reaching a large size, distributed throughout the north temperate zone with a few species extending into Central America , as well as the northern and southern Andes . \n\nWith a few exceptions, alders are deciduous , and the leaves are alternate, simple, and serrated . The flowers are catkins with elongate male catkins on the same plant as shorter female catkins, often before leaves appear; they are mainly wind-pollinated , but also visited by bees to a small extent. These trees differ from the birches ( Betula , another genus in the family) in that the female catkins are woody and do not disintegrate at maturity, opening to release the seeds in a similar manner to many conifer cones .\n\nThe largest species are red alder ( A. rubra ) on the west coast of North America, and black alder ( A. glutinosa ), native to most of Europe and widely introduced elsewhere, both reaching over 30 metres (100 ft). By contrast, the widespread Alnus alnobetula (green alder) is rarely more than a 5 m-tall (16 ft) shrub.\n\nThe genus is divided into three subgenera:\n\nTrees with stalked shoot buds, male and female catkins produced in autumn (fall) but stay closed over winter, pollinating in late winter or early spring, about 15–25 species, including:\n\nTrees or shrubs with stalked shoot buds, male and female catkins produced in autumn (fall) and expanding and pollinating then, three species:\n\nShrubs with shoot buds not stalked, male and female catkins produced in late spring (after leaves appear) and expanding and pollinating then, one to four species:\n\nThe status of the following species is unresolved: [ citation needed ]\n\nThe following hybrids have been described: \n\nThe status of the following hybrids is unresolved: \n\nThe oldest fossil pollen that can be identified as Alnus is from northern Bohemia , dating to the late Paleocene , around 58 million years ago. \n\nThe common name alder evolved from the Old English word alor , which in turn is derived from Proto-Germanic root aliso . The generic name Alnus is the equivalent Latin name, from whence French aulne and Spanish Alamo (Spanish term for \" poplar \"). \n\nAlders are commonly found near streams, rivers, and wetlands. Sometimes where the prevalence of alders is particularly prominent these are called alder carrs . In the Pacific Northwest of North America, the white alder ( Alnus rhombifolia ) unlike other northwest alders, has an affinity for warm, dry climates, where it grows along watercourses, such as along the lower Columbia River east of the Cascades and the Snake River, including Hells Canyon.\n\nAlder leaves and sometimes catkins are used as food by numerous butterflies and moths.\n\nA. glutinosa and A. viridis are classed as environmental weeds in New Zealand. Alder leaves and especially the roots are important to the ecosystem because they enrich the soil with nitrogen and other nutrients.\n\nAlder is particularly noted for its important symbiotic relationship with Frankia alni , an actinomycete , filamentous , nitrogen-fixing bacterium . This bacterium is found in root nodules , which may be as large as a human fist, with many small lobes, and light brown in colour. The bacterium absorbs nitrogen from the air and makes it available to the tree. Alder, in turn, provides the bacterium with sugars , which it produces through photosynthesis . As a result of this mutually beneficial relationship, alder improves the fertility of the soil where it grows, and as a pioneer species , it helps provide additional nitrogen for the successional species to follow.\n\nBecause of its abundance, red alder delivers large amounts of nitrogen to enrich forest soils. Red alder stands have been found to supply between 130 and 320 kilograms per hectare (120 and 290 pounds per acre) of nitrogen annually to the soil. From Alaska to Oregon, Alnus viridis subsp. sinuata ( A. sinuata , Sitka Alder or Slide Alder), characteristically pioneer fresh, gravelly sites at the foot of retreating glaciers. Studies show that Sitka alder, a more shrubby variety of alder, adds nitrogen to the soil at an average rate of 60 kg/ha (54 lb/acre) per year, helping convert the sterile glacial terrain to soil capable of supporting a conifer forest. Alders are common among the first species to colonize disturbed areas from floods, windstorms, fires, landslides, etc. Alder groves often serve as natural firebreaks since these broad-leaved trees are much less flammable than conifers. Their foliage and leaf litter does not carry a fire well, and their thin bark is sufficiently resistant to protect them from light surface fires. In addition, the light weight of alder seeds – numbering 1.5 million per kilogram or 680,000 per pound – allows for easy dispersal by the wind. Although it outgrows coastal Douglas-fir for the first 25 years, it is very shade intolerant and seldom lives more than 100 years. Red alder is the Pacific Northwest's largest alder and the most plentiful and commercially important broad-leaved tree in the coastal Northwest. Groves of red alder 25 to 50 centimetres (10 to 20 in) in diameter intermingle with young Douglas-fir forests west of the Cascades, attaining a maximum height of 30 to 33 m (100 to 110 ft) in about sixty years and then are afflicted by heart rot . Alders largely help create conditions favorable for giant conifers that replace them. \n\nAlder roots are parasitized by northern groundcone .\n\nThe catkins of some alder species have a degree of edibility, and may be rich in protein. Reported to have a bitter and unpleasant taste, they are more useful for survival purposes. The wood of certain alder species is often used to smoke various food items such as coffee , salmon , and other seafood.\n\nAlder is notably stable when immersed, and has been used for millennia as a material for pilings for piers and wharves. Most of the pilings that form the foundation of Venice were made from alder trees. \n\nAlder bark contains the anti-inflammatory salicin , which is metabolized into salicylic acid in the body. Some Native American cultures use red alder bark ( Alnus rubra ) to treat poison oak, insect bites, and skin irritations. Blackfeet Indians have traditionally used an infusion made from the bark of red alder to treat lymphatic disorders and tuberculosis . Recent clinical studies have verified that red alder contains betulin and lupeol , compounds shown to be effective against a variety of tumors. \n\nThe inner bark of the alder, as well as red osier dogwood , or chokecherry , is used by some Indigenous peoples of the Americas in smoking mixtures, known as kinnikinnick , to improve the taste of the bearberry leaf. \n\nAlder is illustrated in the coat of arms for the Austrian town of Grossarl .\n\nElectric guitars, most notably those manufactured by the Fender Musical Instruments Corporation , have been built with alder bodies since the 1950s. Alder is appreciated for its tone that is claimed to be tight and evenly balanced, especially when compared to mahogany, and has been adopted by many electric guitar manufacturers. It usually is finished in opaque lacquer ( nitrocellulose , polyurethane , or polyester ), as it does not have a prominent grain.\n\nAs a hardwood , alder is used in making furniture, cabinets, and other woodworking products. In these applications, its aforementioned lack of prominent grain means that it is often veneered , either by stained light woods such as oak, ash, or figured maple, or by darker woods such as teak or walnut.\n\nAlder bark and wood (like oak and sweet chestnut ) contain tannin and are traditionally used to tan leather.\n\nA red dye can also be extracted from the outer bark, and a yellow dye from the inner bark. \n\nErmanno Olmi 's movie The Tree of Wooden Clogs ( L' Albero Degli Zoccoli , 1978) refers in its title to alder, typically used to make clogs as in this movie's plot. ",
  "Trick-or-treating is a traditional Halloween custom for children and adults in some countries. During the evening of Halloween, on October 31, people in costumes travel from house to house, asking for treats with the phrase \"trick or treat\". The \"treat\" is some form of confectionery , usually candy /sweets, although in some cultures money is given instead. The \"trick\" refers to a threat, usually idle, to perform mischief on the resident(s) or their property if no treat is given. Some people signal that they are willing to hand out treats by putting up Halloween decorations outside their doors; houses may also leave their porch lights on as a universal indicator that they have candy; some simply leave treats available on their porches for the children to take freely, on the honor system .\n\nThe history of trick-or-treating traces back to Scotland and Ireland, where the tradition of guising , going house to house at Halloween and putting on a small performance to be rewarded with food or treats, goes back at least as far as the 16th century, as does the tradition of people wearing costumes at Halloween. There are many accounts from 19th-century Scotland and Ireland of people going house to house in costume at Halloween, reciting verses in exchange for food, and sometimes warning of misfortune if they were not welcomed. In North America, the earliest known occurrence of guising is from 1898, when children were recorded as having done this in the province of British Columbia , Canada. The interjection \"trick or treat!\" was then first recorded in the Canadian province of Ontario in 1917. While going house to house in costume has long been popular among the Scots and Irish, it is only in the 2000s that saying \"trick or treat\" has become common in Scotland and Ireland. Prior to this, children in Ireland would commonly say \" help the Halloween party \" at the doors of homeowners. \n\nThe activity is prevalent in the Anglospheric countries of the United Kingdom, Ireland, the United States and Canada. It also has extended into Mexico. In northwestern and central Mexico, the practice is called calaverita (Spanish diminutive for calavera , \"skull\" in English), and instead of \"trick or treat\", the children ask, \" ¿Me da mi calaverita? \" (\"[Can you] give me my little skull?\"), where a calaverita is a small skull made of sugar or chocolate.\n\nTraditions similar to the modern custom of trick-or-treating extend all the way back to classical antiquity , although it is extremely unlikely that any of them are directly related to the modern custom. The ancient Greek writer Athenaeus of Naucratis records in his book The Deipnosophists that, in ancient times, the Greek island of Rhodes had a custom in which children would go from door-to-door dressed as swallows, singing a song , which demanded the owners of the house to give them food and threatened to cause mischief if the owners of the house refused. This tradition was claimed to have been started by the Rhodian lawgiver Cleobulus . \n\nStarting as far back as the 15th century, among Christians, there had been a custom of sharing soul-cakes at Allhallowtide (October 31 through November 2). People would visit houses and take soul-cakes, either as representatives of the dead, or in return for praying for their souls. Later, people went \"from parish to parish at Halloween, begging soul-cakes by singing under the windows some such verse as this: 'Soul, souls, for a soul-cake; Pray you good mistress, a soul-cake!'\" They typically asked for \"mercy on all Christian souls for a soul-cake\". It was known as 'Souling' and was recorded in parts of Britain, Flanders, southern Germany, and Austria. Shakespeare mentions the practice in his comedy The Two Gentlemen of Verona (1593), when Speed accuses his master of \"puling [whimpering or whining] like a beggar at Hallowmas\". In western England, mostly in the counties bordering Wales, souling was common. According to one 19th century English writer \"parties of children, dressed up in fantastic costume […] went round to the farm houses and cottages, singing a song, and begging for cakes (spoken of as \"soal-cakes\"), apples, money, or anything that the goodwives would give them\". In England, souling remained an important part of Allhallowtide observances until the 19th century, in both Protestant and Catholic areas. \n\nThe practice of giving and eating soul cakes continues in some countries today, such as Portugal (where it is known as Pão-por-Deus and occurs on All Hallows' Day and All Souls' Day), as well as the Philippines (where it is known as Pangangaluwa and occurs on All Hallows' Eve). In other countries, souling is seen as the origin of the practice of trick-or-treating. In the United States, some churches, during Allhallowtide, have invited people to come receive sweets from them and have offered to \"pray for the souls of their friends, relatives or even pets\" as they do so. \n\nSince the Middle Ages , a tradition of mumming on a certain holiday has existed in parts of Britain and Ireland. It involved going door-to-door in costume, performing short scenes or parts of plays in exchange for food or drink. The custom of trick-or-treating on Halloween may come from the belief that supernatural beings, or the souls of the dead, roamed the earth at this time and needed to be appeased.\n\nIt may otherwise have originated in a Celtic festival, Samhain , held on 31 October–1 November, to mark the beginning of winter, in Ireland, Scotland and the Isle of Man , and Calan Gaeaf in Wales, Cornwall , and Brittany . The festival is believed to have pre-Christian roots. In the 9th century, the Catholic Church made 1 November All Saints' Day . Among Celtic-speaking peoples, it was seen as a liminal time, when the spirits or fairies (the Aos Sí ), and the souls of the dead, came into our world and were appeased with offerings of food and drink. Similar beliefs and customs were found in other parts of Europe. It is suggested that trick-or-treating evolved from a tradition whereby people impersonated the spirits, or the souls of the dead, and received offerings on their behalf. S. V. Peddle suggests they \"personify the old spirits of the winter, who demanded reward in exchange for good fortune\". Impersonating these spirits or souls was also believed to protect oneself from them. \n\nIn Scotland and Ireland, \"guising\" – children going from door to door in disguise – is secular, and a gift in the form of food, coins or \"apples or nuts for the Halloween party\" (and in more recent times, chocolate) is given out to the children. The tradition is called \"guising\" because of the disguises or costumes worn by the children. In the West Mid Scots dialect, guising is known as \"galoshans\". In Scotland, youths went house to house in white with masked, painted or blackened faces, reciting rhymes and often threatening to do mischief if they were not welcomed. \n\nGuising has been recorded in Scotland since the 16th century, often at New Year. The Kirk Session records of Elgin name men and women who danced at New Year 1623. Six men, described as guisers or \"gwysseris\" performed a sword dance wearing masks and visors covering their faces in the churchyard and in the courtyard of a house. They were each fined 40 shillings. \n\nA record of guising at Halloween in Scotland in 1895 describes masqueraders in disguise carrying lanterns made out of scooped out turnips, visit homes to be rewarded with cakes, fruit, and money. In Ireland, children in costumes would commonly say \" Help the Halloween Party \" at the doors of homeowners. \n\nHalloween masks are referred to as \"false faces\" in Ireland and Scotland. A writer using Scots language recorded guisers in Ayr, Scotland in 1890:\n\nI had mind it was Halloween . . . the wee callans (boys) were at it already, rinning aboot wi’ their fause-faces (false faces) on and their bits o’ turnip lanthrons (lanterns) in their haun (hand). \n\nGuising also involved going to wealthy homes, and in the 1920s, boys went guising at Halloween up to the affluent Thorntonhall, South Lanarkshire . An account of guising in the 1950s in Ardrossan, North Ayrshire , records a child receiving 12 shillings and sixpence, having knocked on doors throughout the neighbourhood and performed. Growing up in Derry , Northern Ireland in the 1960s, The Guardian journalist Michael Bradley recalls children asking, “Any nuts or apples?”. In Scotland and Ireland, the children are only supposed to receive treats if they perform a party trick for the households they go to. This normally takes the form of singing a song or reciting a joke or a funny poem which the child has memorised before setting out. While going from door to door in disguise has remained popular among Scots and Irish at Halloween, the North American saying \"trick-or-treat\" has become common in the 2000s. \n\nAuthor Nicholas Rogers cites an early example of guising in North America in 1911, where a newspaper in Kingston, Ontario , Canada, reported children going \"guising\" around the neighborhood. The article itself details the practice as such:\n\nBetween six and seven o'clock, the children began to appear in the streets, disguised with all kinds of masks and costumes. The usual programme of visiting the corner groecery stores, hotels and private residences was carried out, the youngesters efforts as elecutionists and vocalists being rewarded with money, apples, nuts, etc. \n\nAmerican historian and author Ruth Edna Kelley of Massachusetts wrote the first book length history of the holiday in the United States; The Book of Hallowe'en (1919), and references souling in the chapter \"Hallowe'en in America\"; \"The taste in Hallowe'en festivities now is to study old traditions, and hold a Scotch party, using Burn's poem Hallowe'en as a guide; or to go a-souling as the English used. In short, no custom that was once honored at Hallowe'en is out of fashion now.\" Kelley lived in Lynn, Massachusetts , a town with 4,500 Irish immigrants, 1,900 English immigrants, and 700 Scottish immigrants in 1920. In her book, Kelley touches on customs that arrived from across the Atlantic; \"Americans have fostered them, and are making this an occasion something like what it must have been in its best days overseas. All Hallowe'en customs in the United States are borrowed directly or adapted from those of other countries\". \n\nWhile the first reference to \"guising\" in North America occurs in 1911, another reference to ritual begging on Halloween appears, place unknown, in 1915, with a third reference in Chicago in 1920. \n\nThe interjection \"Trick or treat!\" — a request for sweets or candy, originally and sometimes still with the implication that anyone who is asked and who does not provide sweets or other treats will be subjected to a prank or practical joke — seems to have arisen in central Canada, before spreading into the northern and western United States in the 1930s and across the rest of the United States through the 1940s and early 1950s. Initially it was often found in variant forms, such as \"tricks or treats,\" which was used in the earliest known case, a 1917 report in The Sault Daily Star in Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario : \n\nAlmost everywhere you went last night, particularly in the early part of the evening, you would meet gangs of youngsters out to celebrate. Some of them would have adopted various forms of \"camouflage\" such as masks, or would appear in long trousers and big hats or with long skirts. But others again didn't. . . . \"Tricks or treats\" you could hear the gangs call out, and if the householder passed out the \"coin\" for the \"treats\" his establishment would be immune from attack until another gang came along that knew not of or had no part in the agreement. \n\nAs shown by word sleuth Barry Popik , who also found the first use from 1917, variant forms continued, with \"trick or a treat\" found in Chatsworth, Ontario in 1921, \"treat up or tricks\" and \"treat or tricks\" found in Edmonton, Alberta in 1922, and \"treat or trick\" in Penhold, Alberta in 1924. The now canonical form of \"trick or treat\" was first seen in 1917 in Chatsworth, only one day after the Sault Ste. Marie use, but \"tricks or treats\" was still in use in the 1966 television special, It's the Great Pumpkin, Charlie Brown . \n\nThe thousands of Halloween postcards produced between the start of the 20th century and the 1920s commonly show children but do not depict trick-or-treating. The editor of a collection of over 3,000 vintage Halloween postcards writes, \"There are cards which mention the custom [of trick-or-treating] or show children in costumes at the doors, but as far as we can tell they were printed later than the 1920s and more than likely even the 1930s. Tricksters of various sorts are shown on the early postcards, but not the means of appeasing them\". \n\nTrick-or-treating does not seem to have become a widespread practice until the 1930s, with the first appearance in the United States of the term in 1928, and the first known use in a national publication occurring in 1939. \n\nBehavior similar to trick-or-treating was more commonly associated with Thanksgiving from 1870 (shortly after that holiday's formalization) until the 1930s. In New York City, a Thanksgiving ritual known as Ragamuffin Day involved children dressing up as beggars and asking for treats, which later evolved into dressing up in more diverse costumes. Increasing hostility toward the practice in the 1930s eventually led to the begging aspects being dropped, and by the 1950s, the tradition as a whole had ceased.\n\nAlmost all pre-1940 uses of the term \"trick-or-treat\" are from the United States and Canada. Trick-or-treating spread throughout the United States, stalled only by World War II sugar rationing that began in April, 1942 and lasted until June, 1947. \n\nEarly national attention to trick-or-treating was given in October, 1947 issues of the children's magazines Jack and Jill and Children's Activities , and by Halloween episodes of the network radio programs The Baby Snooks Show in 1946 and The Jack Benny Show and The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet in 1948. Trick-or-treating was depicted in the Peanuts comic strip in 1951. The custom had become firmly established in popular culture by 1952, when Walt Disney portrayed it in the cartoon Trick or Treat , and Ozzie and Harriet were besieged by trick-or-treaters on an episode of their television show. In 1953 UNICEF first conducted a national campaign for children to raise funds for the charity while trick-or-treating. \n\nAlthough some popular histories of Halloween have characterized trick-or-treating as an adult invention to re-channel Halloween activities away from Mischief Night vandalism, there are very few records supporting this. Des Moines , Iowa is the only area known to have a record of trick-or-treating being used to deter crime. Elsewhere, adults, as reported in newspapers from the mid-1930s to the mid-1950s, typically saw it as a form of extortion , with reactions ranging from bemused indulgence to anger. Likewise, as portrayed on radio shows, children would have to explain what trick-or-treating was to puzzled adults, and not the other way around. Sometimes even the children protested: for Halloween 1948, members of the Madison Square Boys Club in New York City carried a parade banner that read \" American Boys Don't Beg.\" The National Confectioners Association reported in 2005 that 80 percent of adults in the United States planned to give out confectionery to trick-or-treaters, and that 93 percent of children, teenagers, and young adults planned to go trick-or-treating or participating in other Halloween activities. \n\nDespite the concept of trick-or-treating originating in Britain and Ireland in the form of souling and guising, the use of the term \"trick or treat\" at the doors of homeowners was not common until the 1980s, with its popularisation in part through the release of the film E.T. Guising requires those going door-to-door to perform a song or poem without any jocular threat, and according to one BBC journalist, in the 1980s, \"trick or treat\" was still often viewed as an exotic and not particularly welcome import, with the BBC referring to it as \"the Japanese knotweed of festivals\" and \"making demands with menaces\" . In Ireland before the phrase \"trick or treat\" became common in the 2000s, children would say \" Help the Halloween Party \". Very often, the phrase \"trick or treat\" is simply said and the revellers are given sweets, with the choice of a trick or a treat having been discarded.\n\nTrick-or-treating typically begins at dusk on October 31. Some municipalities choose other dates. Homeowners wishing to participate sometimes decorate their homes with artificial spider webs, plastic skeletons and jack-o-lanterns . Conversely, those who do not wish to participate may turn off outside lights for the evening or lock relevant gates and fences to keep people from coming onto their property.\n\nIn most areas where trick-or-treating is practiced, it is considered an activity for children. Some jurisdictions in the United States forbid the activity for anyone over the age of 12. Dressing up is common at all ages; adults will often dress up to accompany their children, and young adults may dress up to go out and ask for gifts for a charity.\n\nChildren of both the St. Louis, Missouri , and Des Moines, Iowa , areas are expected to perform a joke, usually a simple Halloween-themed pun or riddle, before receiving any candy; this \"trick\" earns the \"treat\". In addition, trick-or-treating in the Des Moines area is arranged on a different night preceding Hallowing, known as Beggar's night , with the expectation it will reduce mischief and keep children safer from adult parties and drunk driving that may occur on Halloween proper.\n\nIn some parts of Canada, children sometimes say \"Halloween apples\" instead of \"trick or treat\". This probably originated when the toffee apple was a popular type of candy. Apple-giving in much of Canada, however, has been taboo since the 1960s when stories (of almost certainly questionable authenticity) appeared of razors hidden inside Halloween apples; parents began to check over their children's fruit for safety before allowing them to eat it. In Quebec , children also go door to door on Halloween. However, in French-speaking neighbourhoods, instead of \"Trick or treat\", they will simply say \"Halloween\", though it traditionally used to be \" La charité, s'il-vous-plaît \" (\"Charity, please\"). \n\nSome organizations around the United States and Canada sponsor a \" trunk -or-treat\" on Halloween night (or, on occasion, a day immediately preceding Halloween, or a few days from it, on a weekend, depending on what is convenient). Trunk-or-treating is done from parked car to parked car in a local parking lot, often at a school or church. The activity makes use of the open trunks of the cars, which display candy, and often games and decorations. Some parents regard trunk-or-treating as a safer alternative to trick-or-treating, while other parents see it as an easier alternative to walking the neighborhood with their children.\n\nThis annual event began in the mid-1990s as a \"fall festival\" for an alternative to trick-or-treating, but became \"trunk-or-treat\" two decades later. This change was primarily due to \"discomfort with some of Halloween's themes.\" Some churches and church leaders have attempted to connect with the cultural phenomenon of Halloween, viewing it as an opportunity for cultural engagement with the Gospel. But some have called for more city or community group-sponsored trunk-or-treats, so they can be more inclusive. By 2006 these had become increasingly popular. \n\nIn Portugal , children go from house to house on All Saints Day and All Souls Day, carrying pumpkin carved lanterns called coca , asking everyone they see for Pão-por-Deus singing rhymes where they remind people why they are begging, saying \"...It is for me and for you, and to give to the deceased who are dead and buried\" or \"It is to share with your deceased\" In the Azores the bread given to the children takes the shape of the top of a skull. The tradition of pão-por-Deus was already recorded in the 15th century. In Galicia , particularly in the island of A Illa de Arousa , a similar tradition exists where children ask for alms (usually bread, sweets, fruits, chestnuts, money or small toys) with the phrase \"unha esmoliña polos defuntiños que van alá\" (\"a little charity for the little deceased who are there\"). \n\nIn Sweden , children dress up as witches and monsters when they go trick-or-treating on Maundy Thursday (the Thursday before Easter) while Danish and Faroese children dress up in various attires and go trick-or-treating on Fastelavn (or the next day, Shrove Monday ). In Norway, the practice is quite common among children, who come dressed up to people's doors asking for, mainly, candy. The Easter witch tradition is done on Palm Sunday in Finland ( virvonta ).\n\nIn parts of Flanders , some parts of the Netherlands , and most areas of Germany , Switzerland , and Austria , children go to houses with home-made beet lanterns or with paper lanterns (which can hold a candle or electronic light), singing songs about St. Martin on St. Martin's Day (the 11th of November), in return for treats. Over the last decade, Halloween trick-or-treating has experienced a notable surge in popularity, particularly among children and teenagers in Germany. Austria and the Netherlands have also witnessed a similar trend. The equivalent of 'trick-or-treat' in the German language is 'Süßes oder Saures,' which translates to asking for sweets or threatening something less pleasant, with the direct translation being \"sweet or sour\".\n\nIn Northern Germany and Southern Denmark, children dress up in costumes and go trick-or-treating on New Year's Eve in a tradition called \" Rummelpott [ de ] \". Rummelpott has experienced a massive decrease in popularity over recent decades, although some towns and communities are trying to revive it. \n\nUNICEF started a program in 1950 called Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF in which trick-or-treaters ask people to give money for the organization, usually instead of collecting candy. Participating trick-or-treaters say when they knock at doors \"Trick-or-treat for UNICEF!\" This program started as an alternative to candy. The organization has long produced disposable collection boxes that state on the back what the money can be used for in developing countries.\n\nIn Canada, students from the local high schools, colleges, and universities dress up to collect food donations for the local Food Banks as a form of trick-or-treating. This is sometimes called \"Trick-or-Eat\". ",
  "In philosophy , empiricism is an epistemological view which holds that true knowledge or justification comes only or primarily from sensory experience and empirical evidence . It is one of several competing views within epistemology, along with rationalism and skepticism . Empiricists argue that empiricism is a more reliable method of finding the truth than purely using logical reasoning , because humans have cognitive biases and limitations which lead to errors of judgement. Empiricism emphasizes the central role of empirical evidence in the formation of ideas, rather than innate ideas or traditions . Empiricists may argue that traditions (or customs) arise due to relations of previous sensory experiences. \n\nHistorically, empiricism was associated with the \" blank slate \" concept ( tabula rasa ), according to which the human mind is \"blank\" at birth and develops its thoughts only through later experience. \n\nEmpiricism in the philosophy of science emphasizes evidence, especially as discovered in experiments . It is a fundamental part of the scientific method that all hypotheses and theories must be tested against observations of the natural world rather than resting solely on a priori reasoning, intuition , or revelation .\n\nEmpiricism, often used by natural scientists , believes that \"knowledge is based on experience\" and that \"knowledge is tentative and probabilistic, subject to continued revision and falsification \". Empirical research, including experiments and validated measurement tools, guides the scientific method.\n\nThe English term empirical derives from the Ancient Greek word ἐμπειρία, empeiria , which is cognate with and translates to the Latin experientia , from which the words experience and experiment are derived. \n\nA central concept in science and the scientific method is that conclusions must be empirically based on the evidence of the senses. Both natural and social sciences use working hypotheses that are testable by observation and experiment . The term semi-empirical is sometimes used to describe theoretical methods that make use of basic axioms , established scientific laws, and previous experimental results to engage in reasoned model building and theoretical inquiry.\n\nPhilosophical empiricists hold no knowledge to be properly inferred or deduced unless it is derived from one's sense-based experience. In epistemology (theory of knowledge) empiricism is typically contrasted with rationalism , which holds that knowledge may be derived from reason independently of the senses, and in the philosophy of mind it is often contrasted with innatism , which holds that some knowledge and ideas are already present in the mind at birth. However, many Enlightenment rationalists and empiricists still made concessions to each other. For example, the empiricist John Locke admitted that some knowledge (e.g. knowledge of God's existence) could be arrived at through intuition and reasoning alone. Similarly, Robert Boyle , a prominent advocate of the experimental method, held that we also have innate ideas. At the same time, the main continental rationalists ( Descartes , Spinoza , and Leibniz ) were also advocates of the empirical \"scientific method\". \n\nBetween 600 and 200 BCE, the Vaisheshika school of Hindu philosophy , founded by the ancient Indian philosopher Kanada , accepted perception and inference as the only two reliable sources of knowledge. This is enumerated in his work Vaiśeṣika Sūtra . The Charvaka school held similar beliefs, asserting that perception is the only reliable source of knowledge while inference obtains knowledge with uncertainty.\n\nThe earliest Western proto-empiricists were the empiric school of ancient Greek medical practitioners, founded in 330 BCE. Its members rejected the doctrines of the dogmatic school , preferring to rely on the observation of phantasiai (i.e., phenomena, the appearances). The Empiric school was closely allied with the Pyrrhonist school of philosophy, which made the philosophical case for their proto-empiricism.\n\nThe notion of tabula rasa (\"clean slate\" or \"blank tablet\") connotes a view of the mind as an originally blank or empty recorder (Locke used the words \"white paper\") on which experience leaves marks. This denies that humans have innate ideas . The notion dates back to Aristotle , c. 350 BC :\n\nWhat the mind ( nous ) thinks must be in it in the same sense as letters are on a tablet ( grammateion ) which bears no actual writing ( grammenon ); this is just what happens in the case of the mind. (Aristotle, On the Soul , 3.4.430 a 1).\n\nAristotle's explanation of how this was possible was not strictly empiricist in a modern sense, but rather based on his theory of potentiality and actuality , and experience of sense perceptions still requires the help of the active nous . These notions contrasted with Platonic notions of the human mind as an entity that pre-existed somewhere in the heavens, before being sent down to join a body on Earth (see Plato's Phaedo and Apology , as well as others). Aristotle was considered to give a more important position to sense perception than Plato , and commentators in the Middle Ages summarized one of his positions as \" nihil in intellectu nisi prius fuerit in sensu \" (Latin for \"nothing in the intellect without first being in the senses\").\n\nThis idea was later developed in ancient philosophy by the Stoic school, from about 330 BCE. Stoic epistemology generally emphasizes that the mind starts blank, but acquires knowledge as the outside world is impressed upon it. The doxographer Aetius summarizes this view as \"When a man is born, the Stoics say, he has the commanding part of his soul like a sheet of paper ready for writing upon.\" \n\nDuring the Middle Ages (from the 5th to the 15th century CE) Aristotle's theory of tabula rasa was developed by Islamic philosophers starting with Al Farabi ( c. 872 – c. 951 CE ), developing into an elaborate theory by Avicenna (c. 980 – 1037 CE) and demonstrated as a thought experiment by Ibn Tufail . For Avicenna ( Ibn Sina ), for example, the tabula rasa is a pure potentiality that is actualized through education , and knowledge is attained through \"empirical familiarity with objects in this world from which one abstracts universal concepts\" developed through a \" syllogistic method of reasoning in which observations lead to propositional statements which when compounded lead to further abstract concepts\". The intellect itself develops from a material intellect ( al-'aql al-hayulani ), which is a potentiality \"that can acquire knowledge to the active intellect ( al- 'aql al-fa'il ), the state of the human intellect in conjunction with the perfect source of knowledge\". So the immaterial \"active intellect\", separate from any individual person, is still essential for understanding to occur.\n\nIn the 12th century CE, the Andalusian Muslim philosopher and novelist Abu Bakr Ibn Tufail (known as \"Abubacer\" or \"Ebu Tophail\" in the West) included the theory of tabula rasa as a thought experiment in his Arabic philosophical novel , Hayy ibn Yaqdhan in which he depicted the development of the mind of a feral child \"from a tabula rasa to that of an adult, in complete isolation from society\" on a desert island , through experience alone. The Latin translation of his philosophical novel , entitled Philosophus Autodidactus , published by Edward Pococke the Younger in 1671, had an influence on John Locke 's formulation of tabula rasa in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding . \n\nA similar Islamic theological novel, Theologus Autodidactus , was written by the Arab theologian and physician Ibn al-Nafis in the 13th century. It also dealt with the theme of empiricism through the story of a feral child on a desert island, but departed from its predecessor by depicting the development of the protagonist's mind through contact with society rather than in isolation from society. \n\nDuring the 13th century Thomas Aquinas adopted into scholasticism the Aristotelian position that the senses are essential to the mind. Bonaventure (1221–1274), one of Aquinas' strongest intellectual opponents, offered some of the strongest arguments in favour of the Platonic idea of the mind.\n\nIn the late renaissance various writers began to question the medieval and classical understanding of knowledge acquisition in a more fundamental way. In political and historical writing Niccolò Machiavelli and his friend Francesco Guicciardini initiated a new realistic style of writing. Machiavelli in particular was scornful of writers on politics who judged everything in comparison to mental ideals and demanded that people should study the \"effectual truth\" instead. Their contemporary, Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) said, \"If you find from your own experience that something is a fact and it contradicts what some authority has written down, then you must abandon the authority and base your reasoning on your own findings.\" \n\nSignificantly, an empirical metaphysical system was developed by the Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio which had an enormous impact on the development of later Italian thinkers, including Telesio's students Antonio Persio and Sertorio Quattromani , his contemporaries Thomas Campanella and Giordano Bruno , and later British philosophers such as Francis Bacon , who regarded Telesio as \"the first of the moderns\". Telesio's influence can also be seen on the French philosophers René Descartes and Pierre Gassendi . \n\nThe decidedly anti-Aristotelian and anti-clerical music theorist Vincenzo Galilei (c. 1520 – 1591), father of Galileo and the inventor of monody , made use of the method in successfully solving musical problems, firstly, of tuning such as the relationship of pitch to string tension and mass in stringed instruments, and to volume of air in wind instruments; and secondly to composition, by his various suggestions to composers in his Dialogo della musica antica e moderna (Florence, 1581). The Italian word he used for \"experiment\" was esperimento . It is known that he was the essential pedagogical influence upon the young Galileo, his eldest son (cf. Coelho, ed. Music and Science in the Age of Galileo Galilei ), arguably one of the most influential empiricists in history. Vincenzo, through his tuning research, found the underlying truth at the heart of the misunderstood myth of ' Pythagoras' hammers ' (the square of the numbers concerned yielded those musical intervals, not the actual numbers, as believed), and through this and other discoveries that demonstrated the fallibility of traditional authorities, a radically empirical attitude developed, passed on to Galileo, which regarded \"experience and demonstration\" as the sine qua non of valid rational enquiry.\n\nBritish empiricism , a retrospective characterization, emerged during the 17th century as an approach to early modern philosophy and modern science . Although both integral to this overarching transition, Francis Bacon , in England, first advocated for empiricism in 1620 , whereas René Descartes , in France, laid the main groundwork upholding rationalism around 1640. (Bacon's natural philosophy was influenced by Italian philosopher Bernardino Telesio and by Swiss physician Paracelsus .) Contributing later in the 17th century, Thomas Hobbes and Baruch Spinoza are retrospectively identified likewise as an empiricist and a rationalist, respectively. In the Enlightenment of the late 17th century, John Locke in England, and in the 18th century, both George Berkeley in Ireland and David Hume in Scotland , all became leading exponents of empiricism, hence the dominance of empiricism in British philosophy. The distinction between rationalism and empiricism was not formally made until Immanuel Kant , in Germany, around 1780 , who sought to merge the two views. \n\nIn response to the early-to-mid-17th-century \" continental rationalism \", John Locke (1632–1704) proposed in An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1689) a very influential view wherein the only knowledge humans can have is a posteriori , i.e., based upon experience. Locke is famously attributed with holding the proposition that the human mind is a tabula rasa , a \"blank tablet\", in Locke's words \"white paper\", on which the experiences derived from sense impressions as a person's life proceeds are written.\n\nThere are two sources of our ideas: sensation and reflection. In both cases, a distinction is made between simple and complex ideas. The former are unanalysable, and are broken down into primary and secondary qualities. Primary qualities are essential for the object in question to be what it is. Without specific primary qualities, an object would not be what it is. For example, an apple is an apple because of the arrangement of its atomic structure. If an apple were structured differently, it would cease to be an apple. Secondary qualities are the sensory information we can perceive from its primary qualities. For example, an apple can be perceived in various colours, sizes, and textures but it is still identified as an apple. Therefore, its primary qualities dictate what the object essentially is, while its secondary qualities define its attributes. Complex ideas combine simple ones, and divide into substances, modes, and relations. According to Locke, our knowledge of things is a perception of ideas that are in accordance or discordance with each other, which is very different from the quest for certainty of Descartes . [ citation needed ]\n\nA generation later, the Irish Anglican bishop George Berkeley (1685–1753) determined that Locke's view immediately opened a door that would lead to eventual atheism . In response to Locke, he put forth in his Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) an important challenge to empiricism in which things only exist either as a result of their being perceived, or by virtue of the fact that they are an entity doing the perceiving. (For Berkeley, God fills in for humans by doing the perceiving whenever humans are not around to do it.) In his text Alciphron , Berkeley maintained that any order humans may see in nature is the language or handwriting of God. Berkeley's approach to empiricism would later come to be called subjective idealism . \n\nScottish philosopher David Hume (1711–1776) responded to Berkeley's criticisms of Locke, as well as other differences between early modern philosophers, and moved empiricism to a new level of skepticism . Hume argued in keeping with the empiricist view that all knowledge derives from sense experience, but he accepted that this has implications not normally acceptable to philosophers. He wrote for example, \"Locke divides all arguments into demonstrative and probable. On this view, we must say that it is only probable that all men must die or that the sun will rise to-morrow, because neither of these can be demonstrated. But to conform our language more to common use, we ought to divide arguments into demonstrations, proofs, and probabilities—by ‘proofs’ meaning arguments from experience that leave no room for doubt or opposition.\" And, \n\nI believe the most general and most popular explication of this matter, is to say [See Mr. Locke, chapter of power.], that finding from experience, that there are several new productions in matter, such as the motions and variations of body, and concluding that there must somewhere be a power capable of producing them, we arrive at last by this reasoning at the idea of power and efficacy. But to be convinced that this explication is more popular than philosophical, we need but reflect on two very obvious principles. First, That reason alone can never give rise to any original idea, and secondly, that reason, as distinguished from experience, can never make us conclude, that a cause or productive quality is absolutely requisite to every beginning of existence. Both these considerations have been sufficiently explained: and therefore shall not at present be any farther insisted on.\n\nHume divided all of human knowledge into two categories: relations of ideas and matters of fact (see also Kant's analytic-synthetic distinction ). Mathematical and logical propositions (e.g. \"that the square of the hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the squares of the two sides\") are examples of the first, while propositions involving some contingent observation of the world (e.g. \"the sun rises in the East\") are examples of the second. All of people's \"ideas\", in turn, are derived from their \"impressions\". For Hume, an \"impression\" corresponds roughly with what we call a sensation. To remember or to imagine such impressions is to have an \"idea\". Ideas are therefore the faint copies of sensations. \n\nHume maintained that no knowledge, even the most basic beliefs about the natural world, can be conclusively established by reason. Rather, he maintained, our beliefs are more a result of accumulated habits , developed in response to accumulated sense experiences. Among his many arguments Hume also added another important slant to the debate about scientific method —that of the problem of induction . Hume argued that it requires inductive reasoning to arrive at the premises for the principle of inductive reasoning, and therefore the justification for inductive reasoning is a circular argument. Among Hume's conclusions regarding the problem of induction is that there is no certainty that the future will resemble the past. Thus, as a simple instance posed by Hume, we cannot know with certainty by inductive reasoning that the sun will continue to rise in the East, but instead come to expect it to do so because it has repeatedly done so in the past. \n\nHume concluded that such things as belief in an external world and belief in the existence of the self were not rationally justifiable. According to Hume these beliefs were to be accepted nonetheless because of their profound basis in instinct and custom. Hume's lasting legacy, however, was the doubt that his skeptical arguments cast on the legitimacy of inductive reasoning, allowing many skeptics who followed to cast similar doubt. [ citation needed ]\n\nMost of Hume's followers have disagreed with his conclusion that belief in an external world is rationally unjustifiable, contending that Hume's own principles implicitly contained the rational justification for such a belief, that is, beyond being content to let the issue rest on human instinct, custom and habit. According to an extreme empiricist theory known as phenomenalism , anticipated by the arguments of both Hume and George Berkeley, a physical object is a kind of construction out of our experiences. \n\nPhenomenalism is the view that physical objects, properties, events (whatever is physical) are reducible to mental objects, properties, events. Ultimately, only mental objects, properties, events, exist—hence the closely related term subjective idealism . By the phenomenalistic line of thinking, to have a visual experience of a real physical thing is to have an experience of a certain kind of group of experiences. This type of set of experiences possesses a constancy and coherence that is lacking in the set of experiences of which hallucinations, for example, are a part. As John Stuart Mill put it in the mid-19th century, matter is the \"permanent possibility of sensation\". Mill's empiricism went a significant step beyond Hume in still another respect: in maintaining that induction is necessary for all meaningful knowledge including mathematics. As summarized by D.W. Hamlin:\n\n[Mill] claimed that mathematical truths were merely very highly confirmed generalizations from experience; mathematical inference, generally conceived as deductive [and a priori ] in nature, Mill set down as founded on induction. Thus, in Mill's philosophy there was no real place for knowledge based on relations of ideas. In his view logical and mathematical necessity is psychological; we are merely unable to conceive any other possibilities than those that logical and mathematical propositions assert. This is perhaps the most extreme version of empiricism known, but it has not found many defenders. \n\nMill's empiricism thus held that knowledge of any kind is not from direct experience but an inductive inference from direct experience. The problems other philosophers have had with Mill's position center around the following issues: Firstly, Mill's formulation encounters difficulty when it describes what direct experience is by differentiating only between actual and possible sensations. This misses some key discussion concerning conditions under which such \"groups of permanent possibilities of sensation\" might exist in the first place. Berkeley put God in that gap; the phenomenalists, including Mill, essentially left the question unanswered.\n\nIn the end, lacking an acknowledgement of an aspect of \"reality\" that goes beyond mere \"possibilities of sensation\", such a position leads to a version of subjective idealism. Questions of how floor beams continue to support a floor while unobserved, how trees continue to grow while unobserved and untouched by human hands, etc., remain unanswered, and perhaps unanswerable in these terms. Secondly, Mill's formulation leaves open the unsettling possibility that the \"gap-filling entities are purely possibilities and not actualities at all\". Thirdly, Mill's position, by calling mathematics merely another species of inductive inference, misapprehends mathematics. It fails to fully consider the structure and method of mathematical science , the products of which are arrived at through an internally consistent deductive set of procedures which do not, either today or at the time Mill wrote, fall under the agreed meaning of induction . \n\nThe phenomenalist phase of post-Humean empiricism ended by the 1940s, for by that time it had become obvious that statements about physical things could not be translated into statements about actual and possible sense data. If a physical object statement is to be translatable into a sense-data statement, the former must be at least deducible from the latter. But it came to be realized that there is no finite set of statements about actual and possible sense-data from which we can deduce even a single physical-object statement. The translating or paraphrasing statement must be couched in terms of normal observers in normal conditions of observation.\n\nThere is, however, no finite set of statements that are couched in purely sensory terms and can express the satisfaction of the condition of the presence of a normal observer. According to phenomenalism, to say that a normal observer is present is to make the hypothetical statement that were a doctor to inspect the observer, the observer would appear to the doctor to be normal. But, of course, the doctor himself must be a normal observer. If we are to specify this doctor's normality in sensory terms, we must make reference to a second doctor who, when inspecting the sense organs of the first doctor, would himself have to have the sense data a normal observer has when inspecting the sense organs of a subject who is a normal observer. And if we are to specify in sensory terms that the second doctor is a normal observer, we must refer to a third doctor, and so on (also see the third man ). \n\nLogical empiricism (also logical positivism or neopositivism ) was an early 20th-century attempt to synthesize the essential ideas of British empiricism (e.g. a strong emphasis on sensory experience as the basis for knowledge) with certain insights from mathematical logic that had been developed by Gottlob Frege and Ludwig Wittgenstein . Some of the key figures in this movement were Otto Neurath , Moritz Schlick and the rest of the Vienna Circle , along with A. J. Ayer , Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach .\n\nThe neopositivists subscribed to a notion of philosophy as the conceptual clarification of the methods, insights and discoveries of the sciences. They saw in the logical symbolism elaborated by Frege (1848–1925) and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) a powerful instrument that could rationally reconstruct all scientific discourse into an ideal, logically perfect, language that would be free of the ambiguities and deformations of natural language. This gave rise to what they saw as metaphysical pseudoproblems and other conceptual confusions. By combining Frege's thesis that all mathematical truths are logical with the early Wittgenstein's idea that all logical truths are mere linguistic tautologies , they arrived at a twofold classification of all propositions: the \"analytic\" ( a priori ) and the \"synthetic\" ( a posteriori ). On this basis, they formulated a strong principle of demarcation between sentences that have sense and those that do not: the so-called \" verification principle \". Any sentence that is not purely logical, or is unverifiable, is devoid of meaning. As a result, most metaphysical, ethical, aesthetic and other traditional philosophical problems came to be considered pseudoproblems. \n\nIn the extreme empiricism of the neopositivists—at least before the 1930s—any genuinely synthetic assertion must be reducible to an ultimate assertion (or set of ultimate assertions) that expresses direct observations or perceptions. In later years, Carnap and Neurath abandoned this sort of phenomenalism in favor of a rational reconstruction of knowledge into the language of an objective spatio-temporal physics. That is, instead of translating sentences about physical objects into sense-data, such sentences were to be translated into so-called protocol sentences , for example, \" X at location Y and at time T observes such and such\". The central theses of logical positivism (verificationism, the analytic–synthetic distinction, reductionism, etc.) came under sharp attack after World War II by thinkers such as Nelson Goodman , W. V. Quine , Hilary Putnam , Karl Popper , and Richard Rorty . By the late 1960s, it had become evident to most [ who? ] philosophers that the movement had pretty much run its course, though its influence is still significant among contemporary analytic philosophers such as Michael Dummett and other anti-realists .\n\nIn the late 19th and early 20th century, several forms of pragmatic philosophy arose. The ideas of pragmatism, in its various forms, developed mainly from discussions between Charles Sanders Peirce and William James when both men were at Harvard in the 1870s. James popularized the term \"pragmatism\", giving Peirce full credit for its patrimony, but Peirce later demurred from the tangents that the movement was taking, and redubbed what he regarded as the original idea with the name of \"pragmaticism\". Along with its pragmatic theory of truth , this perspective integrates the basic insights of empirical (experience-based) and rational (concept-based) thinking.\n\nCharles Peirce (1839–1914) was highly influential in laying the groundwork for today's empirical scientific method . Although Peirce severely criticized many elements of Descartes' peculiar brand of rationalism, he did not reject rationalism outright. Indeed, he concurred with the main ideas of rationalism, most importantly the idea that rational concepts can be meaningful and the idea that rational concepts necessarily go beyond the data given by empirical observation. In later years he even emphasized the concept-driven side of the then ongoing debate between strict empiricism and strict rationalism, in part to counterbalance the excesses to which some of his cohorts had taken pragmatism under the \"data-driven\" strict-empiricist view.\n\nAmong Peirce's major contributions was to place inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning in a complementary rather than competitive mode, the latter of which had been the primary trend among the educated since David Hume wrote a century before. To this, Peirce added the concept of abductive reasoning . The combined three forms of reasoning serve as a primary conceptual foundation for the empirically based scientific method today. Peirce's approach \"presupposes that (1) the objects of knowledge are real things, (2) the characters (properties) of real things do not depend on our perceptions of them, and (3) everyone who has sufficient experience of real things will agree on the truth about them. According to Peirce's doctrine of fallibilism , the conclusions of science are always tentative. The rationality of the scientific method does not depend on the certainty of its conclusions, but on its self-corrective character: by continued application of the method science can detect and correct its own mistakes, and thus eventually lead to the discovery of truth\". \n\nIn his Harvard \"Lectures on Pragmatism\" (1903), Peirce enumerated what he called the \"three cotary propositions of pragmatism\" ( L: cos, cotis whetstone), saying that they \"put the edge on the maxim of pragmatism \". First among these, he listed the peripatetic-thomist observation mentioned above, but he further observed that this link between sensory perception and intellectual conception is a two-way street. That is, it can be taken to say that whatever we find in the intellect is also incipiently in the senses. Hence, if theories are theory-laden then so are the senses, and perception itself can be seen as a species of abductive inference , its difference being that it is beyond control and hence beyond critique—in a word, incorrigible. This in no way conflicts with the fallibility and revisability of scientific concepts, since it is only the immediate percept in its unique individuality or \"thisness\"—what the Scholastics called its haecceity —that stands beyond control and correction. Scientific concepts, on the other hand, are general in nature, and transient sensations do in another sense find correction within them. This notion of perception as abduction has received periodic revivals in artificial intelligence and cognitive science research, most recently for instance with the work of Irvin Rock on indirect perception . \n\nAround the beginning of the 20th century, William James (1842–1910) coined the term \" radical empiricism \" to describe an offshoot of his form of pragmatism, which he argued could be dealt with separately from his pragmatism—though in fact the two concepts are intertwined in James's published lectures. James maintained that the empirically observed \"directly apprehended universe needs ... no extraneous trans-empirical connective support\", by which he meant to rule out the perception that there can be any value added by seeking supernatural explanations for natural phenomena . James' \"radical empiricism\" is thus not radical in the context of the term \"empiricism\", but is instead fairly consistent with the modern use of the term \" empirical \". His method of argument in arriving at this view, however, still readily encounters debate within philosophy even today.\n\nJohn Dewey (1859–1952) modified James' pragmatism to form a theory known as instrumentalism . The role of sense experience in Dewey's theory is crucial, in that he saw experience as unified totality of things through which everything else is interrelated. Dewey's basic thought, in accordance with empiricism, was that reality is determined by past experience. Therefore, humans adapt their past experiences of things to perform experiments upon and test the pragmatic values of such experience. The value of such experience is measured experientially and scientifically, and the results of such tests generate ideas that serve as instruments for future experimentation, in physical sciences as in ethics. Thus, ideas in Dewey's system retain their empiricist flavour in that they are only known a posteriori .",
  "David Ginola-Ceze (born 25 January 1967) is a French former professional footballer . A television personality, he has also worked as an actor, model and football pundit.\n\nA forward , Ginola played for ten seasons in France with Toulon , Racing Paris , Brest and Paris Saint-Germain before moving to Newcastle United in the English Premier League in July 1995. He subsequently played for Tottenham Hotspur , Aston Villa and Everton before retiring in 2002. At international level, he made 17 appearances, scoring three goals, for the France national team between 1990 and 1995.\n\nSince his retirement from football, he has become involved in football punditry and acting. Ginola is a regular contributor to BBC , BT Sport and CNN . He has hosted Match of ze Day , a program which broadcasts live Premier League matches on Canal+ . In January 2015, Ginola attempted to run for the FIFA presidency but withdrew after failing to receive the required backing of at least five national football associations. \n\nDavid Ginola-Ceze was born on 25 January 1967 Gassin , Var. \n\nGinola made his first senior appearance for Sporting Toulon as an eighteen-year-old in a 1985 2–0 victory away at Metz . He played fourteen times in his first season, and by 1986 he was a regular in the Toulon line-up. In 1988, he moved to Racing Paris , where he remained until signing for Brest in 1990. There, he began to impress with his flamboyant style of play. In 1991, he played a crucial role in a landmark victory (3–2) against the side who would go on to sign him, Paris Saint-Germain .\n\nGinola joined Paris Saint-Germain in January 1992, at a time when it was pushing for major honours with the financial backing of TV channel Canal+ . He quickly adapted to the club and became a fan favourite noted for his elegant first touch and pace. His popularity did not suffer any consequence even when he admitted that he supported Paris Saint-Germain's rivals Marseille as a boy and that he would have joined them rather than PSG. In his first full season (1992–93), Ginola won the Coupe de France (scoring in the final ) and reached the semi-finals of the UEFA Cup . At the end of 1993, he was also won the French Footballer of the Year award from France Football .\n\nIn his second full season in 1993–94, PSG won the second league title of its history, losing only three times. Alongside Paul Le Guen , Bernard Lama and Antoine Kombouaré and coached by Artur Jorge , Ginola provided 13 goals in 38 games, which made him the top club goalscorer.\n\nThe following season, under new manager Luis Fernandez , proved to be less successful in the league, with Nantes being crowned champions. Ginola scored 11 times in 28 league appearances. Paris Saint-Germain did shine in the cup competitions though, winning another Coupe de France as well as the first edition of the new Coupe de la Ligue . In the UEFA Champions League , the Parisian club caused a major shock after knocking out 1994's finalists Barcelona in the quarter-finals, with Ginola playing particularly well. The club was eliminated at the next hurdle by defending champions AC Milan .\n\nIn the summer of 1995, Ginola decided to leave France. Known to be a Spanish football enthusiast, he was expected to be snapped up by Barcelona. Furthermore, between 1992 and 1995, his stellar displays in European competitions against the Spanish giants Real Madrid and Barcelona had attracted media attention in Spain, with local media dubbing him \" El Magnifico \".\n\nIn 1995, Ginola joined Premier League club Newcastle United for £2.5 million. He was signed at a time when manager Kevin Keegan was attempting to turn the club into one of the major forces in English football, and the board was prepared to offer strong financial backing to sign a number of European superstars. Ginola made his debut against Coventry City on 19 August 1995 in a 3–0 win. He scored his first league goal on 27 August against Sheffield Wednesday in a 2–0 away win, and went on to score five league goals in his first season, including Newcastle's second in their 4–3 defeat to Liverpool at Anfield – the latter considered one of the greatest games in Premier League history. In the 1995–96 , Newcastle finished second, four points behind Manchester United. This was their strongest league performance in decades, and Ginola was an integral part of the team. However, it was a major disappointment that Newcastle had finished second in the Premier League as they had led by up to 12 points as late as January.\n\nIn 1996, Barcelona's English manager Bobby Robson attempted personally to sign Ginola, but Newcastle refused to allow the transfer. To add to their line-up, Newcastle paid £15m, breaking the transfer record, to sign Alan Shearer . Despite this, they finished second again behind Manchester United. Halfway through the season, Kevin Keegan suddenly resigned as manager to be succeeded by Kenny Dalglish . Ginola fell out of favour and sought a transfer elsewhere. \n\nTottenham Hotspur signed Ginola in July 1997 for £2.5 million, where he was joined by Newcastle teammate Les Ferdinand . During the 1998–99 season, Ginola scored one of his most notable goals, when Spurs played Barnsley in the FA Cup sixth round; Ginola weaved past several Barnsley players and finished calmly in the left side of the net for the only goal of the game. In 1999, he was named PFA Players' Player of the Year and FWA Footballer of the Year , becoming the first player in Premiership history to win the award while at a club who finished the season outside of the top four. He also won his only English domestic trophy with Spurs, the 1999 League Cup with a 1–0 victory over Leicester City at Wembley . Ginola is fondly remembered by Tottenham fans for his extravagant forward play and personality off the pitch. He was inducted into the club's Hall of Fame on 11 December 2008. \n\nIn July 2000, Ginola joined Aston Villa for a transfer fee of £3 million. He expressed his disappointment that Tottenham had sold him, saying the news that they had accepted the offer was a \"bombshell\". Villa manager John Gregory challenged Ginola to prove he could still perform in the Premiership, rather than move to a less demanding league abroad, as Ginola was now in his 33rd year and seemed unlikely to continue at professional level for much longer. After being accused by Gregory of being overweight, Ginola celebrated a goal against Manchester City by taking off his jersey to unveil his toned physique. \n\nIn January 2002, he was banned for two matches and fined £22,000 for stamping on an opponent and disputing his dismissal with the fourth official. \n\nIn February 2002, Ginola signed for Everton , playing five games for the club before retiring in May 2002, just after David Moyes took over as manager: Ginola was deemed surplus to requirements by Moyes, and made only one substitute appearance from March onwards. His contract was not renewed and, without a club, decided to retire. He announced his intention to move into either acting or football coaching.\n\nAlthough Ginola was a very prominent French player, he did not see much action with the France national team , being capped only 17 times in his career. In 1987, Ginola played for the France under-21 team at the Toulon Tournament . He was named the tournament's best player after France beat England 4–3 in the final. \n\nGinola is infamous in France for his mistake in a 1994 FIFA World Cup qualifying match against Bulgaria . France needed only a draw in their final group qualifying match on 17 November 1993 to qualify for the finals of the 1994 FIFA World Cup and Ginola had come on as a late substitute for Jean-Pierre Papin . With the score level at 1–1 in the last minute of the match, Ginola overhit a cross intended for Eric Cantona . The ball was collected by Emil Kremenliev , who launched a quick Bulgarian counterattack which resulted in Emil Kostadinov scoring the winning goal. Bulgaria thus won the match 2–1 and qualified for the 1994 World Cup finals at the expense of France. \n\nIn a television interview aired on 18 November 1993, Gérard Houllier , the manager of the France team during its entire 1994 World Cup qualifying campaign, blamed France's 2–1 defeat by Bulgaria entirely on Ginola and described him as someone who had \"sent an Exocet missile through the heart of French football\" and as the \"assassin of the team\". After being barracked by French fans and branded as the \"assassin of French football\" by the French press, Ginola moved to England, signing for Newcastle United . Houllier's successor Aimé Jacquet regularly selected Ginola for international matches in the UEFA Euro 1996 qualifyings, but he would not be selected for the finals. He was used often only as a substitute. Ginola played his last match for the national team in 1995. In April 2012, a French court dismissed Ginola's lawsuit against Gérard Houllier for alleged defamation . In the book Secrets de coachs (Coaches' Secrets) , Houllier was alleged to have made disparaging remarks about Ginola and to have referred to Ginola in offensive terms, blaming him for misplacing the cross that allowed Bulgaria to launch the decisive counterattack and secure the win over France during the final minute of the 1994 World Cup qualifier. \n\nAs a winger , Ginola was renowned for his \"magical\" touch on the ball and his ability to get past players from any type of position and then manage to score a goal. His ability to do that was shown in games for Tottenham and Newcastle, with his most memorable goal in Newcastle's 5–0 win over Premier League giants Manchester United on 20 October 1996, becoming a flamboyant part of the memorable \"Entertainers\" Newcastle side of his era, which also featured other highly acclaimed players including Alan Shearer , Les Ferdinand , Faustino Asprilla , Peter Beardsley and Keith Gillespie .\n\nIn 1999, Dutch legend Johan Cruyff remarked that it was his belief that Ginola was currently the best player in the world. He was also notorious for his difficult character and lack of discipline both on and off the pitch, which led him to be involved in confrontations with other players as well as some of his managers. As such, his compatriot Eric Cantona criticised him for his poor mentality, despite his technical ability. In 2015, The Daily Telegraph placed Ginola at number 15 in their list of \"The top 20 overrated football players of all time,\" describing him as \"one of the world's best on his day, but unfortunately his day was very infrequent. Ginola's carefree attitude infuriated most of the managers he worked with, which is partly why he never lasted more than three years at any club. Too often Ginola was a luxury player who struggled for consistency.\" \n\nGinola worked as a football pundit with the BBC, BT Sport, Canal Plus, CNN, Sky Sports and Talksport . \n\nOn 16 January 2015, Ginola announced that he would be running for the presidency of FIFA for which he was paid a £250,000 fee by the Irish bookmaker Paddy Power . He would attempt to raise £2.3 million to fund the campaign for the FIFA presidency through contributions via a crowdfunding program. He started his campaign on the same day by denouncing the credibility of Sepp Blatter ’s FIFA before admitting he knew little about the governing body's processes or institutions. The elections to select the next FIFA president would be due on 29 May 2015. Ginola withdrew his candidacy on 29 January, the deadline for candidates to formally submit their nominations, after failing to secure the support of at least five national football associations. \n\nIn 2008, Ginola received a silver medal at the International Wine Challenge for a rosé wine produced at his vineyard in Provence . \n\nGinola was one of the contestants in the first season of Danse avec les stars (a French version of the British TV show Strictly Come Dancing ). In 2021, he was announced as a contestant on the twenty-first series of I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! in the United Kingdom. He ultimately finished fourth. \n\nGinola took his first steps towards a career in acting by attending classes at RADA.\n\nGinola made his debut as Didier the Butcher, the leading part in the Anglo-French short film Rosbeef . Rosbeef , a tale of love, lust and a kilo of sausages, premiered during the 2004 Cannes Film Festival. The same year, Rosbeef won a prize, the Prix Coup de Coeur Canal+, at the Festival International de Cinéma et Gastronomie in Dijon. Next, he played the title role, Mr Firecul the devil in the British short film Mr Firecul .\n\nFor his first feature film, The Last Drop , Ginola was cast as Corporal Dieter Max, a renegade German sniper alongside the likes of Agathe de la Boulaye, Michael Madsen, Nick Moran, Karel Roden and Billy Zane. This World War II heist movie premiered in Cannes in 2005 and was released as Operation Matchbox .\n\nIn 2000, Ginola made a cameo appearance in the first episode of the ITV drama series At Home with the Braithwaites . In 2003, Ginola played himself, announcing the results for the first Euro Lottery. In 2004, he played the leading role in The Centre , a BBC television documentary and, in 2006, he appeared in the second series of Channel 4's Coach Trip during episode 22, in which he acted as a tour guide of Sainte-Maxime. Later that year, Ginola appeared, again as himself, in the ITV series City Lights .\n\nIn 2008, Ginola appeared in an episode of Chop Shop on Discovery Turbo, where he had a one-off car designed for his son's birthday; in the same year, he appeared as Alexandre, a fashion photographer, in the special edition of the CBS series The Young and the Restless , shot in Paris to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the show's broadcast in France, where it is known as Les Feux de l'amour .\n\nBefore moving to England, Ginola had already transcended the world of football by featuring in advertising campaigns for the Morgan clothing company and appearing on the catwalk for Cerruti .\n\nIn England, he fronted commercials for a.o. Braun shavers, Carte Noire coffee, Kingston Technologies memory sticks, Ladbrokes sports betting, L'Oréal hair products and Renault cars. \n\nGinola featured in the EA Sports ' FIFA video game series ; he was on the cover for the International edition of FIFA 97 , and was introduced in FIFA 23 as a FUT Hero player. Ginola was an ambassador for the Paris 2012 Olympic bid and was also an ambassador for the French Golf Federation in their successful bid to stage the Ryder Cup 2018 in France. Ginola campaigned worldwide for the English FA bid to host the 2018 FIFA World Cup . \n\nHe is a campaigner for the Red Cross Anti-Landmine campaign and UNESCO and was respectively patron and president of the UK based Vision and Sparks charities. \n\nGinola married fashion model Coraline in 1991. The couple have a son and a daughter, Andrea and Carla; they lived near Saint-Tropez . They split and Ginola entered a relationship with model Maeva Denat, with whom he has a child. \n\nIn May 2010, David Ginola faced a court summons for \"abandoning his family\" after Joëlle Pinquier, 41, claimed he was the father of daughter Joy, 17, and had not handed over support payments. Pinquier claimed Ginola had failed to abide by a 2006 court ruling ordering him to pay child maintenance of £400 a month. The French court ordered him to pay the sum after he refused to take a DNA test to ascertain whether he was the father. Criminal proceedings were dropped after he paid the full £30,000 arrears. \n\nOn the afternoon of 19 May 2016, Ginola was playing a charity football match at the home of Jean-Stéphane Camerini (the organiser of the Mapauto Golf Cup) in Mandelieu-la-Napoule in the southeast of France when he suddenly collapsed due to cardiac arrest and then fell into a coma . He was administered cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) on the pitch by fellow footballer Frédéric Mendy . Minutes later, a team of medics who had arrived in an ambulance used a defibrillator on him; it took five shocks from the machine to restore normal heart rhythm within 10 minutes. Ginola was airlifted minutes later by a helicopter to the Cardiothoracic Center of Monaco 40 km northeast of Mandelieu, where he underwent an immediate, six-hour, operation . Professor Gilles Dreyfus , who operated on Ginola, said that were it not for Mendy who administered CPR on him he would be dead, or have suffered permanent brain damage. Dreyfus said that Ginola had \"very complicated coronary lesions \" which required the quadruple heart bypass operation to be performed. The morning after being admitted to the hospital, Ginola woke up \"perfectly normally\" with no neurological damage and was \"recovering well.\" Dreyfus said that Ginola was \"very lucky to be alive\". On 30 May 2016, Ginola was discharged from hospital and returned home, thanking people on Twitter for their \"incredible messages of love and affection\". \n\nRC Paris\n\nParis Saint-Germain\n\nTottenham Hotspur\n\nAston Villa\n\nFrance U21\n\nFrance\n\nIndividual",
  "The Tuscan order (Latin Ordo Tuscanicus or Ordo Tuscanus , with the meaning of Etruscan order ) is one of the two classical orders developed by the Romans, the other being the composite order . It is influenced by the Doric order , but with un- fluted columns and a simpler entablature with no triglyphs or guttae . While relatively simple columns with round capitals had been part of the vernacular architecture of Italy and much of Europe since at least Etruscan architecture , the Romans did not consider this style to be a distinct architectural order (for example, the Roman architect Vitruvius did not include it alongside his descriptions of the Greek Doric, Ionic , and Corinthian orders). Its classification as a separate formal order is first mentioned in Isidore of Seville 's 6th-century Etymologiae and refined during the Italian Renaissance . \n\nSebastiano Serlio described five orders including a \"Tuscan order\", \"the solidest and least ornate\", in his fourth book of Regole generali di architettura sopra le cinque maniere de gli edifici (1537). Though Fra Giocondo had attempted a first illustration of a Tuscan capital in his printed edition of Vitruvius (1511), he showed the capital with an egg and dart enrichment that belonged to the Ionic. The \"most rustic\" Tuscan order of Serlio was later carefully delineated by Andrea Palladio .\n\nIn its simplicity, the Tuscan order is seen as similar to the Doric order, and yet in its overall proportions, intercolumniation and simpler entablature, it follows the ratios of the Ionic. This strong order was considered most appropriate in military architecture and in docks and warehouses when they were dignified by architectural treatment. Serlio found it \"suitable to fortified places, such as city gates, fortresses, castles, treasuries, or where artillery and ammunition are kept, prisons, seaports and other similar structures used in war.\"\n\nFrom the perspective of these writers, the Tuscan order was an older primitive Italic architectural form, predating the Greek Doric and Ionic , associated by Serlio with the practice of rustication and the architectural practice of Tuscany . Giorgio Vasari made a valid argument for this claim by reference to Il Cronaca 's graduated rustication on the facade of Palazzo Strozzi , Florence. Like all architectural theory of the Renaissance, precedents for a Tuscan order were sought for in Vitruvius , who does not include it among the three canonic orders, but peripherally, in his discussion of the Etruscan temple (book iv, 7.2–3). Later Roman practice ignored the Tuscan order, and so did Leon Battista Alberti in De re aedificatoria (shortly before 1452).\n\nFollowing Serlio's interpretation of Vitruvius (who gives no indication of the column's capital), in the Tuscan order the column had a simpler base—circular rather than squared as in the other orders, where Vitruvius was being followed—and with a simple torus and collar, and the column was unfluted, while both capital and entablature were without adornments. The modular proportion of the column was 1:7 in Vitruvius, and in Palladio's illustration for Daniele Barbaro 's commentary on Vitruvius), in Vignola 's Cinque ordini d'architettura (1562), and in Palladio's I quattro libri dell'architettura (1570). Serlio alone gives a stockier proportion of 1:6. A plain astragal or taenia ringed the column beneath its plain cap.\n\nPalladio agreed in essence with Serlio:\n\nThe Tuscan, being rough, is rarely used above ground except in one-storey buildings like villa barns or in huge structures like Amphitheatres and the like which, having many orders, can take this one in place of the Doric, under the Ionic. \n\nUnlike the other authors Palladio found Roman precedents, of which he named the arena of Verona and the Pula Arena , both of which, James Ackerman points out, are arcuated buildings that did not present columns and entablatures. A striking feature is his rusticated frieze resting upon a perfectly plain entablature \n\nExamples of the use of the order are the Palazzo Massimo alle Colonne in Rome, by Baldassarre Peruzzi, 1532–1536, and the pronaos portico to Santa Maria della Pace added by Pietro da Cortona (1656–1667).\n\nA relatively rare church in the Tuscan order is St Paul's, Covent Garden by Inigo Jones (1633). According to an often repeated story, recorded by Horace Walpole , Lord Bedford gave Jones a very low budget and asked him for a simple church \"not much better than a barn\", to which the architect replied \"Then you shall have the handsomest barn in England\". Christ Church, Spitalfields in London (1714–29) by Nicholas Hawksmoor , uses it outside, and Corinthian within.\n\nIn a typical usage, at the very grand Palladian house of Wentworth Woodhouse in Yorkshire, which is mainly Corinthian, the stable court of 1768 uses Tuscan. Another English house, West Wycombe Park , has a loggia facade in two storeys with Tuscan on the ground floor and Corinthian above. This recalls Palladio's Palazzo Chiericati , which uses Ionic over Doric.\n\nThe Neue Wache is a Greek Revival guardhouse in Berlin , by Karl Friedrich Schinkel (1816). Though in most respects the Greek temple frontage is a careful exercise in revivalism, there are minimal plain bases to the thick fluted columns and, despite having metope reliefs and a large group of sculpture in the pediment, there are no triglyphs or guttae. Nonetheless, despite these \"Tuscan\" aspects, the overall impression is strongly Greek and it is rightly always described as \"Doric\".\n\nTuscan is often used for doorways and other entrances where only a pair of columns are required, and using another order might seem pretentious. Because the Tuscan mode is easily worked up by a carpenter with a few planing tools, it became part of the vernacular Georgian style that lingered in places like New England and Ohio deep into the 19th century. In gardening, \"carpenter's Doric\" which is Tuscan, provides simple elegance to gate posts and fences in many traditional garden contexts.",
  "In classical studies the term epyllion ( Ancient Greek : ἐπύλλιον , plural: ἐπύλλια , epyllia ) refers to a comparatively short narrative poem (or discrete episode within a longer work) that shows formal affinities with epic , but betrays a preoccupation with themes and poetic techniques that are not generally or, at least, primarily characteristic of epic proper.\n\nAncient Greek ἐπύλλιον ( epyllion ) is the diminutive of ἔπος ( epos ) in that word's senses of \"verse\" or \"epic poem\"; Liddell and Scott 's Greek–English Lexicon thus defines ἐπύλλιον as a \"versicle, scrap of poetry\" or \"short epic poem\", citing for the latter definition Athenaeus , Deipnosophistae 2.68 (65a–b): \n\nὅτι τὸ εἰς Ὅμηρον ἀναφερόμενον ἐπύλλιον, ἐπιγραφόμενον δὲ Ἐπικιχλίδες, ἔτυχε ταύτης τῆς προσηγορίας διὰ τὸ τὸν Ὅμηρον ᾄδοντα αὐτὸ τοῖς παισὶ κίχλας δῶρον λαμβάνειν, ἱστορεῖ Μέναιχμος ἐν τῷ περὶ τεχνιτῶν.\n\nA short epic ( epyllion ) attributed to Homer , entitled The One for the Thrushes , acquired this name because Homer was rewarded with thrushes when he sang it to his children—Menaechmus tells the story in his On Artisans .\n\nThis is in fact the only ancient instance of the word that shows anything approaching the connotations with which it is most often employed by modern scholars, and epyllion did not enter the common language of criticism until the 19th century. Wolf was apparently responsible for popularizing the term, for two of his essays from early in that century are referred to by titles including epyllion: Ad Scutum Herculis epyllion Hesiodo subditum animadversiones ( Observations on the Shield of Heracles , an Epyllion Falsely Attributed to Hesiod ) and Theocriti idyllia et epyllia ( The Idylls and Epyllia of Theocritus ). The locus classicus for the sense of epyllion as a hexametric mythological poem that is not only comparatively short, but also imbued to some extent with the characteristics of Hellenistic poetry is Moritz Haupt 's 1855 study of Catullus 64 , but it is likely that Haupt was using a term that had in the preceding decades become common to discussions of the shorter narrative poems of the Alexandrians. \n\nIn the early 20th century the first studies specifically devoted to the concept of the epyllion were undertaken, with Leumann's work on Hellenistic epyllia, Jackson's study of the possible Roman examples, and Crump's attempt at a diachronic study of the epyllion as a single genre whose history could be traced from the Greek poems of the Hellenistic period through the Augustan period's Latin texts. The exact meaning and applicability of the term epyllion has remained a matter of dispute, and Richard Hunter's recent appraisal summarizes well the current opinion regarding epyllia:\n\nEven if the term \"epyllion\" has no ancient authority, there has seemed to be a phenomenon which cannot be ignored. Modern discussion has, however, been bedevilled by the grouping together of poems so diverse as to render that grouping almost meaningless, however many points of individual contact they may share. \n\nAn epyllion is, in its most basic definition, a narrative poem written in dactylic hexameters that is comparatively short. There is disagreement about whether the term should also be applied to works written in elegiac couplets . The exact meaning of \"comparatively short\" varies among modern scholars, with some considering Theocritus, Idyll 13 (75 lines) an epyllion, while Eratosthenes ' Hermes is commonly classed as an example, even though at some 1,600 lines it would probably have taken up two papyrus rolls. A similar variation in lengths is found in epyllia that form episodes within larger works. Virgil's Nisus and Euryalus digression in the Aeneid totals 73 verses and is sometimes considered an epyllion, while the so-called Aristaeus -epyllion ( Georgics 4.315–558) is considerably more substantial and reminiscent of independent epyllia from the Hellenistic period.\n\nThe subject matter of an epyllion often revolves around lesser-known myths or episodes from well-known myths, providing a fresh perspective on familiar stories. These poems frequently delve into themes of love, passion, and the complexities of human relationships. For instance, Catullus's \"Poem 64\" narrates the marriage of Peleus and Thetis , weaving in the story of Ariadne's abandonment by Theseus . This focus on intimate, personal moments allows the epyllion to explore the emotional and psychological dimensions of its characters in a way that grand epics might not.\n\nIn terms of tone, epyllion are characterized by their lively descriptions and a miniaturist approach to storytelling. They often employ a scholarly and allusive style, filled with references to other literary works and mythological tales. The tone can be elevated and formal, similar to that of elegy, but it also allows for a more subjective and emotional expression. This blend of high style with personal, emotional content gives the epyllion a unique voice within the broader landscape of classical literature. \n\nCallimachus, Hecale fr. 1 Hollis = 230 Pf.:\n\nCatullus 64.50–54:",
  "A post in ground construction, also called earthfast or hole-set posts , is a type of construction in which vertical, roof-bearing timbers, called posts , are in direct contact with the ground. They may be placed into excavated postholes , driven into the ground, or on sills which are set on the ground without a foundation. Earthfast construction is common from the Neolithic period to the present and is used worldwide. Post-in-the-ground construction is sometimes called an \"impermanent\" form, used for houses which are expected to last a decade or two before a better quality structure can be built. \n\nPost in ground construction can also include sill on grade, wood-lined cellars , and pit houses . Most pre-historic and medieval wooden dwellings worldwide were built post in ground.\n\nThis type of construction is often believed [ by whom? ] to be an intermediate form between a palisade construction and a stave construction. Because the postholes are easily detected in archaeological surveys, they can be distinguished from the other two.\n\nPost in ground was one of the timber construction methods used for French colonial structures in New France ; it was called poteaux-en-terre.\n\nThe Japanese also used a type of earthfast construction until the eighteenth century, which they call Hottate-bashira (literally \"embedded pillars\"). \n\nThe Dogon people in Africa use post in ground construction for their toguna , community gathering places typically located in the center of villages for official and informal meetings.\n\nIn the historical region of New France in North America, poteaux-en-terre was a historic style of earthfast timber framing . This method is similar to poteaux-sur-sol , but the boulin (hewn posts) are planted in the ground rather than landing on a sill plate . The spaces between the boulin are filled with bousillage (reinforced mud) or pierrotage (stones and mud). Surviving examples of both types of structures can be found at Ste. Genevieve, Missouri .",
  "Cross-gender acting , also called cross-gender casting or cross-casting , is when actors or actresses portray a character of the opposite sex. It is distinct from both transgender and cross-dressing character roles.\n\nCross-gender acting often interacts with complex cultural ideas about gender. It has a diverse history across many cultures, including English Renaissance theatre , French theatre , Japanese theatre , Indian theatres , and Ethiopian theatre.\n\nIn many contexts, such as English and Indian theatres, cross-gender acting is linked to the oppression of women. Many societies prohibited women from performing on stage, so boys and men took the female roles. Female impersonation often decreased in popularity as women gained this right.\n\nFemale cross-cast roles are commonly young boy characters, or, in the case of theatre companies like the Takarazuka Revue Company , male heroes.\n\nSome cultures, like Tang and Yuan dynasty China, had traditions of cross-gender acting for both men and women concurrently.\n\nModern American cross-gender acting, especially in musical theatre roles where men play women, is often employed for comedic effect.\n\nDuring the early development of ancient Greek theatre in the sixth century BC, both Athenian women and men performed. By the fifth century, changing Athenian cultural codes excluded women from public life, and thus the theatre. After this point, men played both male and female roles. \n\nIn Renaissance England , women were forbidden from performing on stage, so female roles in the plays of William Shakespeare and his contemporary playwrights were originally played by cross-dressing men or boys. (See also Stage Beauty .) Therefore, the original productions of the above-mentioned Shakespeare plays actually involved double-cross-dressing: male actors playing female characters disguising themselves as males. Academic research into the contemporary attitudes towards the practise have yielded a variety of interpretations. Historian Laura Levine argues that \"an all-male acting troupe was the natural and unremarkable product of a culture whose conception of gender was \"teleologically male\". \n\nCross-gender acting, while not specifically making a statement about crossdressing , helped produce negative judgements and statements about those who did cross-dress in the Renaissance era. In order to maintain a hierarchy and a gendered division of labour, a prominent feature of the Renaissance era, women and men needed to be distinct. Cross-gender acting disrupted gender distinction. Male-to-female cross-gender actors were either viewed as shameful, or they gained wealth and social status when playing women who married well-off men. In instances where boys acted as women, it was because they were seen as objects of desire, much like women, and they were also in a subordinate position in the hierarchy scale. \n\nSome instances of female-to-male cross-dressing in theatre allowed women to challenge patriarchal notions of gender and explore both masculinity and femininity within this hierarchy. In The Roaring Girl , the protagonist, Moll, cross-dresses for liberty rather than safety, and thus exists in both male and female spaces. \n\nIn order to believably portray women onstage, male actors needed the audience to believe that the characters were truly female, meaning MTF actors needed the audience to desire them. Once male actors stepped into the roles of women, it was feared that they would adopt transgressive feminine traits, which led to the belief that crossdressing was an undisciplined act. While troubling to some, the idea of female impersonation proved that gender was malleable when it came to England in the Renaissance Era. Theatre was considered a more acceptable venue for crossdressing, chiefly because it confined the act to a distinct place. \n\nWhen boy actors portrayed female characters, religious authorities feared that the boys would become the women they embodied in plays, and therefore would transform into objects of erotic thoughts for male spectators. This sense of desire would supposedly come from the boys' failed attempts to represent binary womanhood onstage. The female costume on a boy's body created a sense of confusion between knowledge and visibility; it was thought that this confusion forced male spectators to translate women's appearances to the bodies of boys. \n\nShakespeare has been criticized for inciting male spectator desire on boy-to-female characters in his plays such as As You Like It , where boys played highly sexualized female characters. \n\nIn Chinese opera specialized male actors who play female roles ( dàn ) are referred to as nándàn (男旦) ; the practice arose during the Qing dynasty due to imperial prohibitions against women performing on stage, considered detrimental to public morality. \n\nGoing back as far as the Tang dynasty , both men and women played roles of the opposite sex in theatre. For women in the Yuan dynasty , cross-gender acting was liberating, as playing men allowed to embark on scholarly pursuits typically restricted from women. Despite this partial liberty, female actors were treated like prostitutes . During the Qing dynasty , women were prohibited from performing at all due to imperial anxieties about female sexuality. This led to the development of female impersonation techniques such as cai ciao (false-foot skill), which simulated a woman's bound feet . \n\nJapanese kabuki theatre began in the 17th century with all-female troupes performing both male and female roles. In 1629 the disrepute of kabuki performances (or of their audiences) led to the banning of women from the stage, but kabuki's great popularity inspired the formation of all-male troupes to carry on the theatrical genre. In kabuki, the portrayal of female characters by men is known as onnagata . The practice is detailed in a story of the same name by the Japanese writer, Yukio Mishima . All roles in Noh dramas are traditionally played by male actors; actors playing female roles wear feminine costumes and female-featured masks.\n\nCross-dressing in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century Spain was frequent among actors, and the theater was at the time the most popular form of entertainment. There was a fascination with female cross-dressers particularly (women dressed as men), who were \"extremely popular\" in the \" Golden Age Comedia \". Male actors might play the \"women dressed as men\" parts. Spain eventually found this cross-dressing to be threatening to social order, and passed laws targeting female transvestites throughout the 1600s. Despite the negative reactions and disapproval, it continued to remain very popular in the comedia . \n\nMuch like England, France also had a tradition of cross-casting, but by the second half of the 17th century these roles had dwindled. They existed in unique forms during the reign of Louis XIV however—mainly in comedy, school drama, ballet, and opera. By the mid-sixteenth century, female actors in France became more and more common, but they were selective in the roles they wished to play. French female actors did not want to play unglamourous or “ugly” women, so these roles were often cross-cast. One example of this is the nourrice , or “nurse” archetype—a male-acted older, humorous, post-menopausal woman whose undesirability contrasted the primary female roles played by women. \n\nIn the Ballet de cour tradition, men often played women. Famously, King Louis XIV performed in many such roles. For Louis XIV, cross-dressing in a theatre context was not satirical but rather a show of power. When performing, these men dressed in distinct costumes. They wore skirts, but their hemlines rose above the knee, displaying their thighs in a style that would have been prohibited for women but was permitted for men. This placed these roles in a third category that was neither man nor woman precisely. \n\nA travesti is a theatrical term referring to the portrayal of a character in an opera , play , or ballet by a performer of the opposite sex. More specifically, a theatrical or operatic role in which an actress appears in male clothing is called a \" breeches role \" (\"pants role\" or \"trouser role\"), and roles once performed by a male soprano castrato may instead be performed by a female mezzo-soprano or contralto .\n\nIn the late 19th century, one of the most famous actresses was Vesta Tilley , who worked in a music hall from age five well into her fifties. In the late 1890s, she was the highest paid woman in Britain. What made her so famous was her tendency to dress as a man and act out \"masculine\" scenes and roles. Centuries before, Julie d'Aubigny , aka \"La Maupin\" (1670–1707), had also been famous for her breeches roles.\n\nIn 1904, Nina Boucicault originated the theatrical tradition of cross-sex casting for Peter Pan , continued thereafter by Maude Adams , Marilyn Miller , Eva Le Gallienne , Sandy Duncan , and Cathy Rigby , among others. In 1954 Mary Martin portrayed the title character in the musical Peter Pan . \"The boy who would never grow up\" is a classic trouser role, as is Cherubino in The Marriage of Figaro (by Beaumarchais ).\n\nIn pantomime plays that are traditionally adaptations of fairy tales and performed around Christmastide , the role of lead male was once commonly played by a principal boy —a young, attractive, female. This practise has fallen out of favour recently, with popular male television and pop stars taking these roles. Conversely, the role of a pantomime dame , a middle aged woman played by a man in drag for comic relief, is still one of the mainstays of panto.\n\nSimilarly, Georgy Millyar played a role of Baba Yaga , an ugly old woman with supernatural abilities in a dozen of films, including Vasilisa the Beautiful (1940) and Jack Frost (1964). He used to say that an actress does not ever allow anyone to make her that ugly, while he does. \n\nInto the 19th and 20th centuries, French anthropologist Jane Dieulafoy and her husband Marcel hosted private salons where they staged classical plays. The genders of the characters stayed true to the original texts, but the actors were cast blindly with no regard for gender. \n\nAfter the May Fourth Movement in the 1910s, women were once again permitted to perform in China, and both men and women were cast true to their gender. \n\nMany of the characters in Chinese Opera were performed by men; they cross-dressed to play the roles of women. A famous cross-dressing opera singer is Mei Lanfang . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn the early 20th century, the Shanghainese Yue opera genre developed from an all male to an all female genre. During a particularly turbulent period of Chinese history, Yue opera offered female actors and audiences a voice beyond the nationalist narrative often associated with the May Fourth Movement and Cultural Revolution . In a society undergoing drastic social change, including shifting ideas of gender and family structures, Yue opera catered to two of the public's new fixations: women and romance. The singers explored the realities of womanhood, being an immigrant, urbanization, and voicelessness, creating a women's culture and supporting the idea that women should be at the forefront of a modern nation. Although male performers were introduced into this opera in the 1950s and 1960s, today, Yue opera is still associated as the only all female opera and the second most popular opera in China. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Takarazuka Revue is a contemporary all-female Japanese acting company, known for their elaborate productions of stage musicals . Female performers act in both male and female roles. \n\nTakarazuka was created in the early 20th century by Ichizō Kobayashi Takarazuka. The performers attend the Takarazuka Music School (Takarazuka Ongaku Gakkō) for two years to receive training. Actresses specialize in either male roles ( otokoyaku ) or female roles ( musumeyaku ), with male-role actresses receiving top billing. The performers are evaluated based on appearance, behavioral performance ability, and facial/body signifiers (e.g. jaw structure, eyebrows, height, shoulder span). Additionally, behavioral test runs examine the voice, mannerisms, and overall persona of the performers. \n\nDespite providing opportunities for women onstage, the structure of Takarazuka still reflected the patriarchal control of Japan. The musumeyaku represented fictional, masculinist recreations of women. As for the otokoyaku, their roles aimed to emulate a model man that women would desire. \n\nTo further explain the role of the otokoyaku ‘male’ character, Lorie Brau contends that, \"The otokoyaku does not represent a 'nama no otoko', that is to say, a 'man in the raw', but an idealized, 'beautiful' man—a man without dirt, sweat, roughness, and a need to dominate. The otokoyaku's female following see her as a version of this kind of androgynous, safe beauty rarely found in real men\". Therefore, while the otokoyaku presents a male guise that is the “risoteki na dansei” (ideal man) women are attracted to, the otokoyaku also represents a type of androgynous freedom for the female viewer. Fans see women breaking the confines of societal expectations, as well as embracing the feminine side of the male-masculine image. However, despite this progressive multi-dimensional role of the otokoyaku, the reality of expressing these interpretations onstage is limited for the performers. With the creation of the Takarazuka Revue Company, Ichizō Kobayashi intended to use the troupe to reinforce the patriarchal status quo of Japan by training his female performers how to be obedient women and “good wives and wise mothers”. Despite the non-conventional otokoyaku, Robertson states that Kobayashi believed women would, through their performances as men, \"[learn] to understand and appreciate males and the masculine psyche”. \n\nThroughout the 20th century, a Western theatre tradition developed in Ethiopia, starting in 1913 with the play Ye Awrewoch Commedia by Tekle Hawariat Tekle Mariyam . All parts were played by boys. As the tradition grew over the decades with the development of new theatre companies, the boys themselves were unhappy playing women; some feared embarrassment, while others were afraid of being recognized in their feminine roles. At the boys' urging, the troupes began actively recruiting girls. \n\nAt the Empress Menen Girls' Boarding School, Ethiopian scholar, writer, and politician Senedu Gebru wrote and directed plays for her female students between 1942 and 1955. With the students' parents as audience members, these plays were performed at the end of the school year. Girls played both male and female roles. \n\nAfter the fall of the Government of the Ethiopian Empire and with the opening of the Theatre Arts Department at Addis Ababa University , the 1970s saw further efforts to involve women onstage. Male-as-female cross-casting thus fell out of fashion. \n\nIn the Indian context, Parsi, Gujarati, and Marathi theatrical traditions from the 19th and 20th centuries cast men in female roles. Where women lacked public visibility, these roles introduced audiences to the idea of women in public life. Female impersonators allowed audiences to engage with femininity. Women could then use the traits that were considered acceptable in theatre characters as a pathway into their own public life. Within theatre itself, female impersonators also created niches that female performers could occupy later. \n\nIn animations and video games, it is not unusual for female actors to voice young male characters, especially prepubescent ones. Notable examples are Nancy Cartwright voicing Bart Simpson in The Simpsons and Junko Takeuchi voicing Naruto Uzumaki in the anime series Naruto . Voice actress Tara Strong has voiced multiple young male characters such as Timmy Turner and Ben Tennyson . Instances of male actors voicing female characters have also occurred, including Bob Peterson as Roz in Monsters, Inc. and Brad Bird as Edna Mode in the Incredibles franchise .\n\nIn musical theatre, some characters have become synonymous with cross-sex acting. The musical Hairspray frequently sees a male actor portraying the female role of Edna Turnblad, whilst the role of Miss Trunchbull in Matilda the Musical is traditionally a male performer. However, whilst Edna was played by a cross cast John Travolta in the film adaptation , Miss Trunchbull in the film of Matilda was instead played by actress Emma Thompson .\n\nIn children's theatre productions, male roles will often be played by girls due to the majority of children participating in theatre at a young age being girls.\n\nWhen the casting director of a production decides to employ cross-sex acting, selecting the actors in this way is sometimes also called \"cross-sex casting\" or simply \"cross-casting\".\n\nIncreasingly, modern American theatre is cast \"blindly,\" in which roles are determined based on talent, regardless of \"gender, race, age, and body type.\" ",
  "A toast is a ritual during which a drink is taken as an expression of honor or goodwill. The term may be applied to the person or thing so honored, the drink taken, or the verbal expression accompanying the drink. Thus, a person could be \"the toast of the evening\", for whom someone \"proposes a toast\" to congratulate and for whom a third person \"toasts\" in agreement. The ritual forms the basis of the literary and performance genre, of which Mark Twain 's \"To the Babies\" is a well-known example. \n\nThe toast as described in this article is rooted in Western culture , but certain cultures outside that sphere have their own traditions in which consuming a drink is connected with ideas of celebration and honor. While the physical and verbal ritual of the toast may be elaborate and formal, merely raising one's glass towards someone or something or clinking glasses with someone else's and then drinking is essentially a toast as well, the message being one of goodwill towards the person or thing indicated.\n\nAccording to various apocryphal stories, the custom of touching glasses evolved from concerns about poisoning. By one account, clinking glasses together would cause each drink to spill over into the others' (though there is no real evidence for such an origin). According to other stories, the word toast became associated with the custom in the 17th century, based on a custom of flavoring drinks with spiced toast . The word originally referred to the lady in whose honor the drink was proposed, her name being seen as figuratively flavoring the drink. The International Handbook on Alcohol and Culture says toasting \"is probably a secular vestige of ancient sacrificial libations in which a sacred liquid was offered to the gods: blood or wine in exchange for a wish, a prayer summarized in the words 'long life!' or 'to your health! ' \" \n\nToasts are generally offered at times of celebration or commemoration, including certain holidays, such as New Year's Eve . Other occasions include retirement celebrations, housewarming parties, births, etc. The protocol for toasting at weddings is comparatively elaborate and fixed. At a wedding reception , the father of the bride , in his role as host, regularly offers the first toast, thanking the guests for attending, offering tasteful remembrances of the bride's childhood, and wishing the newlyweds a happy life together. The best man usually proposes a toast in the form of best wishes and congratulations to the newlyweds. A best man's toast takes the form of a short speech (3–5 minutes) that combines a mixture of humor and sincerity. The humor often comes in the shape of the best man telling jokes at the groom's expense whilst the sincerity incorporates the praise and complimentary comments that a best man should make about the bride and groom, amongst others. The actual \"toast\" is then delivered at the end of the speech and is a short phrase wishing the newlyweds a happy, healthy, loving life together. The maid of honor may follow suit, appropriately tailoring her comments to the bride. The groom may offer the final toast, thanking the bride's parents for hosting the wedding, the wedding party for their participation, and finally dedicating the toast to the bridesmaids. \n\nTypical traditional wedding toasts include the following: \n\n(to the couple) Here's to your coffins May they be made of hundred-year-old oaks Which we shall plant tomorrow. May you both live as long as you want, and never want as long as you live May the best of your yesterdays be the worst of your tomorrows.\n(to the bride) May I see you grey And combing your grandchildren's hair.\n\nToasts are also offered on patriotic occasions, as in the case of Stephen Decatur 's famous \"Our country! In our intercourse with foreign nations may we always be in the right; but our country, right or wrong.\" Equally traditional are satiric verses:\n\nHere's to dear old Boston, The home of the bean and the cod, Where Lowells speak only to Cabots, And Cabots speak only to God. \n\nToasts may be solemn, sentimental, humorous, bawdy, or insulting. The practice of announcing one's intention to make a toast and signalling for quiet by rapping on the wineglass, while common, is regarded by some authorities as rude. Except in very small and informal gatherings, a toast is offered standing. At a gathering, none should offer a toast to the guest of honor until the host has had the opportunity to do so. In English-speaking countries, guests may signal their approval of the toast by saying \"hear hear\". The person honored should neither stand nor drink, but after the toast should rise to thank the one who has offered the toast and take a drink, perhaps but not necessarily offering a toast in turn. As toasts may occur in long series, experienced attendees often make sure to leave enough wine in the glass to allow participation in numerous toasts. \n\nPutting one's glass down before the toast is complete, or simply holding one's glass without drinking is widely regarded as impolite, suggesting that one does not share the benevolent sentiments expressed in the toast, nor the unity and fellowship implicit in toasting itself. Even the non-drinker is counseled not to refuse to allow wine to be poured for a toast. Inverting the glass is discouraged. \n\nToasting traditionally involves alcoholic beverages . Champagne (or at least some variety of sparkling wine ) is regarded as especially festive and is widely associated with New Year's Eve and other celebrations. Many people nowadays substitute sparkling fruit juice (often packaged in champagne-style bottles), and many authorities consider it perfectly acceptable to participate in a toast while drinking water. Toasting with an empty glass may be viewed by some as acceptable behavior for the non-drinker, though feigning to drink from such a glass would likely be seen as ridiculous. The person giving the toast should never do so with an empty glass, even if the glass contains nothing more than water.\n\nTeetotalers may view the drinking of toasts to be abominable and incompatible with their stand, as witnessed by this narrative from The Teetotaler (1840):\n\nAt the anniversary of Cheshunt College, Sir Culling Eardley Smith was in the chair. This gentleman, after dinner, said \"he had subscribed to the Teetotal Pledge, which of course was incompatible with the drinking of toasts;\" when the Rev. J. Blackburn, (minister of Claremont Chapel, Pentonville,) said \"he was not a teetotaler,— he was not in bondage, —and on that subject he had very recently been preaching.\" What could the Rev. Gentleman mean by this, but that he had recently been preaching against Teetotalism? Let the Rev. Gentleman look at drinking customs and their enormous evils, and ask himself if he has done his duty; or whether he expects to be pronounced \"a good and faithful servant \", if he continues even from the pulpit to encourage the great damning evil of this nation. Mr. Donaldson said that he was happy to add, that one of the most popular ministers of the day, the Rev. J. Sherman, gave Mr. B. a pretty severe and well-merited reply, by saying, \"His brother Blackburn had said, he (Mr. B.) was not in bondage; he must be allowed to say, that he rejoiced that he (Mr. S.) had been enabled to break through the old and stupid custom of washing down sentiments by draughts of intoxicating liquors. He had thus become a free man. \n\nMr. Donaldson concluded with some very severe animadversions upon the infamous conduct of Mr. Blackburn. \n\nIt is a superstition in the Royal Navy, and thus the Australian, Canadian and New Zealand Navies as well as the United States Navy that a toast is never to be made with water, since the person so honored will be doomed to a watery grave. During a United States Air Force Dining In , all toasts are traditionally made with wine except for the final toast of the night made in honor of POWs / MIAs ; because these honorees did not have the luxury of wine while in captivity, the toast is made with water. Some versions of the protocol prescribe a toast in water for all deceased comrades. \n\nIt is or was the custom in the (British) Royal Navy to drink the Loyal toasts sitting, because in old-type wooden warships below decks there was not enough headroom to stand upright.\n\nL'Chaim in Hebrew is a toast meaning \"to life\". When a couple becomes engaged, they get together with friends and family to celebrate. Since they drink l'chaim (\"to life\"), the celebration is also called a l'chaim.\n\nThe origins of the custom to toast this way may be traced to an account described in the Talmud, where R. Akiva said upon pouring cups of wine poured at a banquet a benediction of \"Wine and life to the mouth of the sages, wine and life to the mouth of the sages and their students.\" Many reasons for this custom have been offered. One reason based on the Zohar is to wish that the wine would be tied to the tree of life and not to the tree of death with which Eve had sinned. A second reason brought forward is that there was a common practice to make people who intend to kill drink wine and thereby be calmed, and therefore there is a custom to proclaim \"to life!\" over wine in the hope that it will prevent bloodshed. A third reason is that wine was created to comfort those who are in mourning (based on Proverbs 31:6) and there emerged a practice to toast thus when drinking in sad times in the hope that one day the drinker will drink wine in good happy times, and the practice of toasting this way subsequently extended to all situations. \n\nProsit is a Latin word, meaning roughly \"be well\", which is a toast in Latin and modern Italian, from which the German short form \"prost\" is derived. This is a toast in German. The expression dates back to the beginning of the 18th century when it was used among university students and eventually made its way into everyday language. In a ceremonious context and in connection with a short speech, the English word \"toast\" may also be used.\n\nThe Latin word comes from the verb \"prodesse\" (= \"to benefit sth/sb\", \"to be beneficial\"). Consequently, \"prosit\" is the conjugated form (3rd person Singular, Present Subjunctive, Active) and therefore an optative : \"To you/ to your health\". Like the colloquial \"prost\", \"prosit\" was originally used by university students. \n\nIn German, synonyms like \"Wohl bekomm's!\", \"Zum Wohl!\", and many versions from other languages may also be used instead of \"prosit\". The acclamation itself is also referred to as a \"prosit\". The verb form is \"zuprosten\", where the prefix \"zu\" means that the speech act is targeted at one or several people.\n\nIn the Swabian dialect , the word has the further meaning of a belch , called a \"Prositle\". The acclamation is followed by the clinking of glasses, often linked to other rules like making eye contact. This ritual is commonly attributed to a medieval custom, whereby one could avoid being poisoned by one's drinking companions, as a few drops of each beverage got mixed when clinking glasses . There is every likelihood that this did not work. It was much more effective for one table to share one or more drinking vessels, a procedure which was common for a long time.\n\nIn Danish, Swedish, and Norwegian, \"prosit\" is a blessing used in response to a sneeze, in the same way the English expression \"bless you\" is used.\n\nIn Germany, toasting, not necessarily by words but usually just by touching each other's drinking vessels, is usually a very closely observed part of culture. In private company, no one should drink a sip of alcohol before having toasted all the other people at the table. In doing this, it is very important to look directly into the other drinker's eyes. Not practising this is considered rude and often, humorously, believed to attract all kinds of bad luck (e.g. \"seven years of bad luck\" and the like).\n\nIn the British Royal Navy , the officers' noon mess typically began with the loyal toast , followed by a toast distinctive for the day of the week:\n\nThe sequence was also prescribed in at least one publication for the United States Navy . \n\nA toast might be spontaneous and free-form, a carefully planned original speech, or a recitation of traditional sentiments such as this Irish example: \n\nMay the road rise to meet you. May the wind be always at your back. May the sun shine warm upon your face. And rains fall soft upon your fields. And until we meet again, May God hold you in the hollow of His hand.\n\nAn informal variation of the last two lines:\n\nAnd may ye be in Heaven a half-hour afore the devil knows ye're dead!\n\nIn various cultures worldwide, toasting is common and to not do so may be a breach of etiquette . The general theme of a toast is \"good luck\" or \"good health\". At formal meals in certain countries of the Commonwealth of Nations, the first toast to be proposed is traditionally the Loyal Toast (\" The King \"). This may be adapted in other countries to give a loyal toast to the appropriate head of state . \n\nSelected examples of toasts worldwide:",
  "beIN Sports ( / ˈ b iː ɪ n / BEE -in ) is a Qatari multinational network of sports channels owned and operated by the media group beIN . The network has played a major role in the increased commercialization of Qatari sports. Its chairman is Nasser Al-Khelaifi , and its CEO is Yousef Obaidly . \n\nbeIN Sports is the dominant television sports channel in the MENA region. It also operates channels in France, United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Turkey, Hong Kong, Singapore, Brunei, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines and Thailand.\n\nAl Jazeera Media Network entered the European television rights market in June 2011 when it purchased a package of live French football Ligue 1 matches from 2012 to 2016 for € 90 million a year. The deal makes them joint broadcasters of domestic top-flight football in France alongside long-term rights holders Canal+ . The broadcaster also acquired the pay-TV rights to the UEFA Champions League , Europa League from 2012 to 2015, Euro 2012 and Euro 2016 in France. France was targeted as Al Jazeera's first entry into Europe due to the fact that there were no dedicated sports channels, unlike in the United Kingdom . \n\nThe name \"beIN Sports\" was first revealed in early 2012. According to Nasser Al-Khelaifi , the director of Al Jazeera Sports, the name \"symbolises the mind of two channels aiming at bringing live and exclusive broadcasting of the biggest events.\" Former Canal+ executive Charles Bietry was hired by Al Jazeera to launch the channels. The channels will be available on all cable and IPTV providers and select satellite providers. CanalSat – owned by Canal+ Group – has declined to carry the channels as of March 2012. beIN Sports was officially launched on June 1, 2012, in time to broadcast Euro 2012. beIN Sports 2 commenced on July 27, 2012, in time to broadcast the French Ligue 2 season, and before the start of the 2012–13 Ligue 1 season. In June 2015, it was announced that Nasser Al-Khelaifi had plans to create the beIN Sports channel on TV operators to cable in Brazil. \n\nbeIN Sports Spain officially began broadcasting on 1 July 2015, the date on which Gol Televisión ceased broadcasting all football games, which during the summer were in place under the slogan \"Change the game\", \"Cambia el juego\" in Spanish. Thanks to an alliance between Al Jazeera and Mediapro , beIN Sports Spain offers UEFA Champions League (2015–2018), UEFA Europa League (2015–2018), UEFA Super Cup (2015–2017), Premier League (2015–16 season only), Serie A , Primeira Liga , Jupiler Pro League , Ligue 1 , DFB Pokal , Coupe de la Ligue , KNVB Beker , Johan Cruijff Shield , Copa de Brasil , CONCACAF Gold Cup , Copa Libertadores and Copa Sudamericana . beIN Sports Spain can be viewed over the Internet, smart TV ( LG and Samsung ), PC, laptops, tablets, Smartphones (iOS/Android), PS3/PS4, Chromecast , TV Operators ( Orange , Vodafone and Telecable ) and online platforms (beIN Sports Connect, Total Channel and YouTube ). On Wednesday August 19, due to the start of the playoffs of the UEFA Champions League, beIN Sports (Spain) begins to emit beIN Sports MAX (up to 8 simultaneous channels) to broadcast all matches of the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League.\n\nbeIN Sports (Spain) offers customers Gol Televisión lost up to 30 June 2015 an exclusive promotion to watch beIN Sports through beIN Sports CONNECT, and through the app \"TotalChannel\". It also offers channels like FOX, AXN, TNT, and the best entertainment channels in HD for €5/month for two months, then from the third month onwards €9.99/month. beIN Sports (Spain) developed a channel licensed for bars in Spain called \"beIN Sports BAR\". The channel stopped transmission on 9 August 2018.\n\nFor the 2016–2017 season and onwards, beIN Sports Spain has the television rights to La Liga (eight games a day, always one of Real Madrid or FC Barcelona) and Copa del Rey .\n\nIn 2015, beIN Sports expanded its global footprint by acquiring Digiturk, a Turkish-pay-TV platform, which added millions of subscribers to its audience. This move positioned the network as a leader in both European and Asian markets. By 2024, beIN Sports achieved a major milestone, attracting over 1.2 billion views for its coverage of the UEFA Euro 2024 tournament, setting a new standard for sports broadcasting globally (beIN Sports, 2024). The network also embraced digital innovation, offering subscribers access to live and on-demand content through the beIN CONNECT platform, thus enhancing its accessibility and user engagement (Al-Obaidly, 2019).\n\nOn November 1, 2017, beIN Sports created an Olympic Channel in the Middle East and North Africa region. \n\nbeIN Sports was firstly launched in Singapore through Starhub TV Channel 213 on 19 April 2016. beIN Sports was briefly launched on Singtel TV Channel 109 from 6 August 2019 to 2 October 2021. The latter was then returned on 11 March 2022 due to the closure for Fox Sports Asia . beIN Sports 1 though 3 for Singtel TV are now located on Channel 126, 127 and 128 respectively.\n\nbeIN Sports launched on Malaysia Astro Channel 837 on 1 August 2016 before the channel was relocated to Channel 818 on 1 August 2019 and then to Channel 820 on 17 October 2024. The channel was also launched on Unifi TV on 1 May 2022.\n\nbeIN Sports MAX, which mostly aired UEFA Champions and Europa League , launched on Singtel TV on Channel 110 on 19 October 2018. It also launched on Astro on Channel 841 on 4 December 2018 before it was relocate to Channel 819 on 1 August 2019. On 7 January 2022, beIN Sports Max was rebranded to beIN Sports 3 in Malaysia and Singapore.\n\nIn France, where beIN Sports was launched for the first time, it holds the rights to broadcast major football tournaments, including Ligue 1 , La Liga , Serie A , Bundesliga and the European Football Championship . Along with Canal+ , beIN Sports also holds the rights to broadcast all the Champions League matches from 2021 to 2024. \n\nIn the United States and Canada, beIN Sports holds the rights to broadcast La Liga , Ligue 1 , CONMEBOL World Cup Qualifiers , Copa Libertadores and Football League Championship matches and Real Madrid TV . It launched two channels in the United States (English and Spanish), in August 2012, followed by a full channel in Canada, on 31 January 2014.\n\nIn Indonesia, beIN Sports holds the rights to broadcast La Liga , Ligue 1 , Serie A (2013–2016, return in 2018), Süper Lig (2017–18 until 2021–22), A-League (starts 2017–18 season), FFA Cup (starts 2017 season), CAF World Cup Qualifiers , Major League Soccer (MLS), and more. In Malaysia, beIN Sports offers comprehensive coverage of European Football Leagues including La Liga, Ligue 1 and more.\n\nIn Hong Kong, beIN Sports holds the rights to broadcast Serie A , Ligue 1 , Major League Soccer (MLS), A-League (starts 2017–18 season), FFA Cup (starts 2017 season), UEFA Champions League , UEFA Europa League and more.\n\nIn Thailand, beIN Sports holds the rights to broadcast La Liga , Serie A (2013–2016, return in 2018), Ligue 1 , Bundesliga , MLS (until 2022), Süper Lig (2017–18 until 2021–22), A-League (starts 2017–18 season), FFA Cup (starts 2017 season), UEFA Champions League , UEFA Europa League and more.\n\nIn Australia, the channel was launched in late November 2014, following the acquisition of Setanta Sports Australia which was rebranded as beIN Sports. beIN Sports Australia holds the rights to broadcast UEFA Champions League (2015–2018), UEFA Europa League (2015–2018), EFL Cup , La Liga , Serie A , Ligue 1 , Bundesliga , MLS , Copa Libertadores and RBS Six Nations . On 14 March 2016, beIN Sports Australia expanded from one to three channels, all in HD, and as of 15 May 2016 has been made available to all Foxtel sport pack subscribers, rather than the original add-on cost for a single SD channel. Fetch subscribers still only have access to beIN Sports 1, which is an add-on cost each month.\n\nbeIN Connect, also known as beIN Sports Connect, is a subsidiary over-the-top content (OTT) service started in 2014. It allows users to watch live and on-demand video content from a Mac, Windows PC, mobile phone, Xbox 360, Xbox One, PlayStation 3 or PlayStation 4 via a broadband or Wi-Fi internet connection. On-demand content comprises sports highlights, movies, and TV shows. beIN CONNECT is available as a paid service in France, Spain, United States, Canada, Turkey (in 2017), Asia-Pacific (in 2017) and the MENA region. \n\nFrom 2014 to 2017, beIN Sports held the rights to broadcast the 2014 FIFA World Cup. In 2018, beIN Sports broadcast the 2018 FIFA World Cup . On 23 February 2020, beIN Sports announced to broadcast special shows and dedicated programs for 1000 days until the 2022 FIFA World Cup . To be broadcast from February 25 on its free-to-air and HD1 channel, the programs were supposed to include historic matches, highlights from the international best players, history of Qatari football and special clips of the day Qatar won the World Cup bid. \n\nFrom 2012 to 2015, the network held the rights to broadcast all UEFA Euro 2012 . From 2016 to 2021, beIN Sports broadcast Euro 2016 matches on the French pay-TV platform while TF1 and M6 have the free-to-air rights to select matches. \n\nOn November 23, 2019, Canal+, beIN Sports, Fox Sports, TVE, Antena 4 and Sports 2 won the rights to broadcast Champions League matches On France, Spain, Uk, Canada and Latin America between 2021 and 2024. \n\nIn France, beIN Sports holds one of five rights packages for Ligue 1 from 2012 to 2016 – the package consisting of Friday night and Sunday evening matches. The other four packages are held by Canal+ . It also shows Ligue 2 matches. For the UEFA Champions League , it has the rights to broadcast all matches except the 13 weekly first-choice picks (yet to be awarded to any broadcaster as of April 2012) from 2012. It also owns the rights to all UEFA Europa League matches including the final. \n\nOn France, Spain, Russian and United States beIN Sports and Canal+ also share the rights to Serie A and Bundesliga matches. It also airs FA Cup , Football League Championship , La Liga , Argentine Primera División and Brasileirao . In the United States , the network holds the rights package for Ligue 1 , La Liga , FIFA World Cup qualification rounds in the Americas ( CONMEBOL and CONCACAF ), except for home matches by Mexico and the United States (which are both held by Univision and ESPN ). In April 2020, beIN Sports announced that it will broadcast a month-long online football gaming tournament organized by Paris Saint-Germain to entertain people stuck at home, due to Coronavirus. On 13 February 2021, beIN Sports secured exclusive domestic broadcast rights from Canal+ for the remaining matches of Ligue 2's 2020/21 season. BeIN already had the rights to broadcast two live matches per match week under its existing €30 million per season deal with the French Professional Football League (LFP) for the 2020-24 cycle. With this sublicensing deal, beIN can air the remaining eight live matches per week until the end of 2020-21 season. \n\nOn 26 June 2024, all matches of Ligue 2 will be broadcast in Bein Sports from 2024–25 to 2028–29.\n\nbeIN Sports held the rights to broadcast the seasons of Qatar Stars League .\n\nOn December 27, 2017, beIN Sports bought the broadcasting rights of the Turkish Süper Lig until 2027. \n\nBeIN shows live Premiership games.\n\nOn France, Spain and Latin America beIN Sports broadcasts November test matches, European Rugby Champions Cup , European Rugby Challenge Cup , English Premiership and Pro14 .\n\nbeIN Sports will broadcast the Super League including all home matches of French side Catalans Dragons . Other competitions include the Australian National Rugby League and State of Origin series . \n\nbeIN Sports was awarded the rights to the 2013 Rugby League World Cup and broadcast all matches live. \n\nIn 2017, cricket debuted on the channel. BeIN Sports has acquired the Cricket Australia and England and Wales Cricket Board rights for the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region, and broadcast the 2017–18 Ashes series and 2017–18 Big Bash League season .\n\nBeIN Sports also acquired the Indian Premier League (IPL) rights in April 2018 for the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region in a five-year deal with Star India up to 2022.\n\nOn early December 31, 2024, beIN Sports held the rights to broadcast the 2024 Pakistan Super League .\n\nOn 23 February 2013, as part of Al-Jazeera's increasing footprint in the Superbike World Championship , which they hold rights in the Middle East, and the transitional shutdown of Fox Sports motorsport operations in Charlotte, North Carolina, beIN Sports acquired the rights to the Superbike World Championship in the United States, which also includes live coverage of the races and also the support classes, which had never been televised in the United States in the past. \n\nbeIN Sports also airs the FIA World Rallycross Championship in the United States, the Middle East, and North Africa.\n\nIn 2016, beIN Sports began to broadcast two more Dorna-controlled motorcycle road racing series in the United States and Canada -- MotoGP , the Superbike World Championship , giving them control of FIM road racing on North American television. The deal ended after the 2019. The channel also aired MotoAmerica from 2016 to 2017.\n\nFrom 2014 to 2018, they had broadcast rights for the MENA, Spain and Uk region. However, in February 2019, beIN Sports, citing market conditions , declined to renew rights, and, until February 2024, the rights were instead given to MBC Action , whose parent company Middle East Broadcasting Center is majority-owned by the Saudi government. In early 2023, beIN Sports got the rights to broadcast the Formula One in southeast Asia from 2023 to 2028, and, in February 2024, reacquired rights for the MENA region as well as Turkey, which runs through 2033. \n\nbeIN Sports has acquired exclusive broadcast rights to the EHF Champions League ( Team Handball ). The EHF Champions League is the most important club competition for men's and women's teams in Europe and involves the leading teams from the top European nations.\n\nIn January 2013, beIN Sports also acquired the broadcast rights to the 2013 World Men's Handball Championship . beIN Sports USA aired live, delayed and pre-recorded HD games in the US, between January 11–27, 2013.\n\nBasketball programming on beIN Sports has gained prominence with exclusive coverage of the NBA and Euroleague games. The network also highlights basketball’s growing popularity in the MENA region, where events like the annual NBA Abu Dhabi Games have become a major attraction, which draw fans from across the globe (Baraheni, 2024). Expert commentators like Eric Micoud guarantee that both seasoned fans and newcomers gain valuable insights into the games (Sim, 2024).\n\nIn France, beIN Sports airs the Wimbledon Championships , Davis Cup , Fed Cup , ATP World Tour Masters 1000 , ATP World Tour 500 , ATP World Tour Finals , and some ATP World Tour 250 and WTA Tour tournaments.\n\nbeIN Sports will be the exclusive broadcaster of WTA Tour in the United States, Australia, the Middle East, and North Africa from 2017 to 2021 and then returned to 2024 to 2031 with Turkey was added it rights.\n\nWith commentators such as Tatiana Golovin and Sébastien Grosjean, the network enhances the viewing experience by offering expert perspectives on player strategies and match dynamics (Martin et al., 2017).\n\nIn France, beIN Sports aired the 2012 Summer Olympics tennis, handball and basketball tournaments. In athletics, beIN Sports airs the IAAF Diamond League and several international marathons and World Indoor Meetings. In cycling, it broadcasts some UCI World Tour road races, including the Giro d'Italia , as well as the UCI Road, Track, Mountain Bike and Trials World Championships (\"Mountain Bike Mania,\" 2016-2018). The channel also airs the French Handball Championship, FIVB World League , EuroLeague ( top-tier European basketball club competition), National Basketball Association (NBA), National Football League (NFL), and Major League Baseball (MLB).\n\nOn 25 May 2016, the U.S. beIN Sports announced that it had acquired partial rights to Conference USA college sports , including a package of selected college football , basketball , baseball , softball , and soccer matches. The deal marks the first American football -related contract the U.S. network has acquired. \n\nOn 20 April 2018, professional wrestling debuted on the channel with the premiere of Major League Wrestling 's weekly series, MLW Fusion , on beIN Sports USA . \n\nThe channel's football coverage is notably fronted by Richard Keys and Andy Gray .\n\nFootball remains at the core of beIN Sports' programming, featuring tournaments like the FIFA World Cup, UEFA Champions League, and La Liga. Iconic broadcasters Richard Keys and Andy Gray lead the channel’s analysis, offering in-depth commentary and tactical breakdowns of matches. This approach has elevated beIN Sports as the go-to network for football fans globally (BeIN Sports, 2024).\n\nbeIN Sports has heavily invested in digital platforms to expand its reach. The beIN CONNECT platform enables subscribers to stream live and on-demand content across multiple devices, including smartphones, tablets, and smart TVs. During UEFA Euro 2024, beIN CONNECT recorded over 1.2 billion views, showcasing the platform's ability to engage a global audience at scale (BeIN Sports, 2024). By leveraging advanced technologies, the network personalizes recommendations and ensures high-quality viewing experiences, keeping pace with evolving viewer expectations (Sim, 2024).\n\nbeIN Sports 1 HD broadcasts year-round live football with the Premier League (2013–2019) being prominent as well as content from Arsenal, Liverpool, and Spurs club channels in streaming media . Other live coverage will come from the Serie A (2013–2021 exclude 2016–2018), Ligue 1 , Major League Soccer (MLS), the Brazilian national leagues (Paulistao & Brasileirão) (2013–2015), as well as major cup tournaments such as the FA Cup (2013–2024), Coppa Italia (2013 and 2014), and the Coupe de la Ligue . Other sports are broadcasting on that channel including Formula One (since 2023), and the World Rally Championship . In 2014, beIN Sports was pulled from First Media due to carriage fee concern and this channel was removed from Transvision in 2016. However, MNC Vision just carries this channel from 2016 until 2022 and then returned from 17 September 2024 as UEFA Champions League rights has returned into the channel in Indonesia after 2015-18 seasons.\n\nFrom 2016, this channel also broadcast not only football but other sporting events, such as: Tennis, Motor-racing, Handball, and many more.\n\nbeIN Sports 2 HD will also feature live football but will have another sports remit. Starting January 2022, beIN Sports 2 will begin airing tennis coverages as the latter acquired broadcast rights of the Australian Open , the French Open and the ATP tours .\n\nbeIN Sports 3 HD same as the beIN Sports 2 HD. This channel has been launched since August 2016, replacing the Premier League channel.\n\nPremier League HD will be a 24-hour Premier League-dedicated channel in Indonesia broadcasting nearly 1,600 hours of live programming from 2013–14 to 2015–16 season. This includes all 380 Premier League matches per season, weekly magazine show Premier League World, as well as pre-match coverage and post-game analysis in addition to weekly preview and review shows and highlights in interviews. \n\nDespite most of its North American broadcast rights contracts covering both the United States and Canada, beIN Sports initially was not authorized to broadcast in the country nor had it sub-licensed any of its programmings to local broadcasters. The channel had a difficult time finding a broadcaster willing to partner up with it to launch its services. In October 2013, beIN Sports launched an online streaming service in Canada through their website www.beINsportsplay.ca . The live service was available at no charge for registered users until 1 February 2014; since then, users can access the streams for CAD$19.99 per month. On-demand coverage is not available through beIN Sports Play Canada. \n\nOn 18 December 2013, beIN Sports announced they had reached a deal with Ethnic Channels Group, a local ethnic broadcaster, to launch their services in Canada. The channel was officially launched on 31 January 2014 via MTS and NEXTV .\n\nbeIN Sports HD is available on Shaw Cable on channel 234, Rogers Cable on channel 391, on Bell Satellite & Fibe on channel 1412, on Videotron on channel 797 and through OTT broadcaster DAZN .\n\nMoreover, beIN Sports entered the market through partnerships with local providers such as Ethnic Channels Group and digital platforms like DAZN. The availability of the beIN CONNECT platform has further expanded its accessibility, which offers flexible viewing options for subscribers (Chee, 2023).\n\nIn July 2018, beIN Sports struck a multi-million rights deal with French sports agency, Amaury Sport Organisation (ASO), granting it the sole rights in MENA to broadcast all its major events until 2023. But in April 2019, ASO confirmed that one its major event, Dakar Rally would be held in Saudi Arabia from 2020 under a multi-year accord. Following which, beIN said that ASO was trying to exit its MENA deal and instead making a transition towards Saudi broadcaster. However, in October 2019, the president of the Nanterre Commercial Court in France ruled that ASO must continue to maintain its five-year exclusive rights agreement with beIN. \n\nbeIN Sports has partnered with the Amaury Sport Organization (ASO) to broadcast exclusive events like the Dakar Rally, further diversifying its sports portfolio and appealing to motorsport fans (Al-Obaidly, 2019).\n\nbeIN Sports' market positions in not important regions have led to concerns over the network's dominance. In 2016, French authorities blocked a deal by beIN Sports France to sub-license its sports properties to Canal+ Sport , as it would have given the partnership control of 80% of French sports media rights. At the 2017 World Men's Handball Championship , whose international media rights were owned by beIN Sports, French radio stations declined to air the tournament as beIN Sports wanted them to pay administrative fees about five times higher than technical cost, in violation of French law. The 2017 Africa Cup of Nations were also left without domestic television coverage in four countries participating in the tournament – Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia – due to exorbitant sublicensing fees being demanded from free-to-air broadcasters by beIN as the region's rightsholder. \n\nIn August 2018, beIN Sports was fined, and subsequently banned from operating in Saudi Arabia, with the government citing its forced bundling of the networks with unrelated services. beIN criticised the actions as being politically-motivated. The following March, beIN's rights to the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) were stripped in Saudi Arabia to \"cancel\" its monopoly on the sport, due to the \"illegality of BeIN Sport [ sic ] to transmit in the Kingdom due to the grave violations of the laws and regulations BeIN Sport has committed\", and \"its inability to obtain the required licenses necessary for it to fulfil its commitments in transmitting AFC's competitions to the viewers and followers in the Kingdom\". beIN threatened legal action, accusing the AFC of colluding with the Saudi Arabian Football Federation to breach its contract. \n\nBy contrast, beIN Sports' relatively niche position in the United States (where it focuses particularly on international sports not picked up by other networks) led to criticism of its broadcasting deal with the WTA Tour for non-domestic events, as the channel's prioritisation of football in its scheduling, narrower carriage than its previous broadcaster Tennis Channel , as well as being dropped by several major cable providers in 2018, limited the availability of its coverage. These issues led to concerns that the limited coverage would give women's tennis little exposure outside of majors and domestic tour events. beIN Sports U.S. dropped the WTA Tour after the 2018 season, and it subsequently signed a new contract to return to Tennis Channel in the 2019 season. \n\nIn April 2020, amidst claims of Saudi PIF taking over Premier League club Newcastle United , beIN Sports wrote a letter to league's chief executive Richard Masters and issued a notice to 19 clubs, except Newcastle. In its letter, the broadcaster claimed that Saudi Arabian pay TV network beoutQ , has been illicitly regulating its copyright protected content and demanded Premier League to block the deal. \"Given the crippling economic effect that coronavirus is having on the sports industry, this is all happening at a time when football clubs need to protect their broadcast revenue the most,\" BeIN chief executive Yousef al-Obaidly wrote. \n\nbeIN has unveiled its new streaming service for the MENA region. \n\nIn 2014, the Premier League restricted beIN Sports in the MENA region to airing one match per-week with a 3:00 p.m. UK time kickoff on television only. As these matches may not be broadcast within the United Kingdom due to domestic rights restrictions , the Premier League showed concerns that beIN was not taking adequate steps to prevent its streaming broadcasts from being used for unauthorized retransmissions, especially into the United Kingdom. In November 2014, the Premier League reinstated beIN's full access to 3 p.m. fixtures. \n\nIn 2020, the company wrote to Premier League clubs to warn them against agreeing to a takeover deal with a Saudi-led consortium for Newcastle United, because of Saudi backing for the \"theft\" of BeIN transmissions by the Saidi broadcaster beoutQ . The Premier League board is currently allowed the deal to go through.\n\nDue to the then-ongoing diplomatic crisis between Qatar and other Arab countries, beIN has been restricted from doing business in Saudi Arabia and the UAE since June 2017. The UAE un-banned the MENA network a month later, with no progress from Saudi Arabia reported. Months later in August 2018, it was revealed the Saudi pirate broadcaster, beoutQ , has been pirating the networks' programming in the region for over a year, which has faced criticism from beIN and rightsholders over its \"industrial-scale\" copyright infringement . However, no law firm in Saudi Arabia was reportedly willing to represent the rightsholders in Saudi courts. Nor was the Saudi-majority owned ArabSat reported of responding to takedown pleas against beoutQ. In August 2019, the operations were eventually taken off-air. However, in November of same year, beIN Media alerted that despite ceasing satellite transmissions in mid-August, pirate broadcast operation, beoutQ, was still distributing its copyrighted content via the IPTV function of set-top boxes. beIN Media's licence in Saudi Arabia was permanently revoked by Saudi authorities in July 2020 under the charges of antitrust practices following the World Trade Organization ruling the prior month concluding that Saudi Arabia didn't take any noticeable action in stopping beoutQ, and to the contrary, harboured and sponsored its operations. beIN Media says that even after the signing of al-'Ula Declaration in early January 2021, Saudi Arabia is yet to reverse its decision to ban its operations in the national market.\n\nHowever, on 6 October 2021, beIN media group said in a statement that Saudi Arabia will soon lift a four year ban on the channel and close its pirate websites, only beIN holds the rights to broadcast the Premier League across the Middle East. \n\nIn November 2019, beIN Sports announced that it was reviewing its partnership with Serie A and considering cancelling all of its agreements in Italian football, following the league's decision to play a Supercoppa Italiana match between Juventus and Lazio in Saudi Arabia, despite piracy concerns. \"It is remarkable what Serie A is seemingly prepared to jeopardize, not only all the financial revenues from one of its biggest broadcaster partners, but also the exposure beIN gives to the league in markets all around the world,\" a statement from the television network read. \n\nbeIN Sports normally shows top-tier Italian football matches in 35 countries but on Saturday night, anyone tuning in to watch Torino take on Parma in Serie A 's return would have been disappointed.\n\nIn matchweek 27 of 2019–20 season , other countries (exc. NZ ), viewers were treated instead to a Turkish Süper Lig match between Denizlispor and Besiktas. And a late-night trawl through beIN Sports website for all of Saturday's results suggested there weren't any games played in Italy—just England, Spain, France and Germany. For the record, Torino and Parma drew 1-1.\n\nBut in matchweek 28, beIN Sports social medias apologizes to all global viewers and announced the comeback coverage. \n\nbeIN paid $500 million to broadcast Serie A from 2018 to 2021, an agreement that has been beset by snags. It claims strong backing from competitions including England's Premier League, Spain's La Liga and the Wimbledon tennis championships, as part of a long-running campaign against its sports rights being pirated in Saudi Arabia. ",
  "The philosopher king is a hypothetical ruler in whom political skill is combined with philosophical knowledge. The concept of a city-state ruled by philosophers is first explored in Plato 's Republic , written around 375 BC. Plato argued that the ideal state – one which ensured the maximum possible happiness for all its citizens – could only be brought into being by a ruler possessed of absolute knowledge, obtained through philosophical study. From the Middle Ages onwards, Islamic and Jewish authors expanded on the theory, adapting it to suit their own conceptions of the perfect ruler.\n\nSeveral historical figures, including Marcus Aurelius and Ashoka the Great , have been described by ancient and modern writers as embodying the philosopher king ideal.\n\nThe Republic is a Socratic dialogue . In the first two books, Socrates is challenged to give a definition of justice , which he proposes to accomplish by imagining how an ideal city-state would function. He suggests that the ideal state would be ruled over by a specially trained Guardian class, in whom a spirited nature would be combined with a philosophic disposition. \n\nSocrates goes on to discuss various aspects of life within the state. In the fifth book, Socrates' interlocutors ask him whether the state he is describing could ever exist in reality. He replies that this could only happen on one condition:\n\nUntil philosophers are kings, or the kings and princes of this world have the spirit and power of philosophy ... cities will never have rest from their evils,—no, nor the human race, as I believe,—and then only will this our State have a possibility of life and behold the light of day. \n\nSocrates clarifies this comment by distinguishing between true and false philosophers. The true philosopher (or \"lover of wisdom\") is one who loves \"the truth in each thing\", as opposed to those who only love the things themselves. This is a reference to Plato's belief that all particular things are only shadows of eternal Forms . Only the philosopher, therefore, is qualified to rule, as only the philosopher has knowledge of the absolute truth and is able to apply this knowledge for the good of the state. \n\nSocrates next outlines the qualities which the ideal philosopher must possess, including truthfulness, temperance, justice, and a good memory. It is observed, however, that this ideal is in sharp contrast to reality, as many philosophers are \"utter rogues\", and the best of them are generally considered to be useless. Socrates explains the poor reputation of philosophers through the metaphor of the Ship of State , in which he compares Athenian democracy to a group of mutinous sailors vying with one another for control of the helm of a ship. The sailors, having themselves no knowledge of the art of navigation, deny that this is a necessary qualification for a pilot, and heap abuse on anyone who does not help them to achieve their goals. Socrates then acknowledges that many philosophers are indeed corrupt, but attributes this to the fact that they are brought up in a corrupt society. Only in the ideal state will a philosopher be able to achieve his full potential, \"and be the saviour of his country, as well as of himself\". \n\nHaving returned to the subject of the ideal state, Socrates elaborates on the way in which his Guardians would be educated, in order to lead them to a full and total knowledge of the Forms. This education will last thirty-five years, and prospective Guardians must then spend a further fifteen years occupying lesser offices, in order to gain experience of life. At the age of fifty, they will be qualified to rule. As philosophers, however, they will have no desire to engage in politics; they will do so only from a sense of duty. \n\nSocrates concludes this portion of the dialogue by reaffirming that the ideal state is capable of being realised, but only if one or more philosophers were to somehow come to power in a city. He further suggests that if this were to happen, the quickest way for a philosopher king to bring the perfect state into existence would be to send away every inhabitant over the age of ten, so as to be able to bring up the younger generation in accordance with philosophic principles. \n\nAristotle , in his Politics , criticises many aspects of Plato's political theory, and sets out his own ideas about how a perfect city should be governed. Rather than proposing, as Plato does, the establishment of a ruling class, Aristotle argues that all citizens should take an equal share in the administration of the city. However, in one passage (book 3, ch. 13), Aristotle does write that if one or more people happened to be found who far excelled their fellow citizens in virtue, it would be against the natural order for such people to be subject to the rule of their inferiors, and they should therefore be made \"kings in their state for life\". While Aristotle here comes close to endorsing the philosopher-king ideal, he does not expressly state that this virtuous leader should be skilled in philosophy, and his writings more usually draw a sharp distinction between the theoretical wisdom of a philosopher and the political wisdom of a ruler. \n\nWhen the Politics was translated into Latin in the thirteenth century, it became the foundational text for political philosophy in the Christian world, and Plato's ideas were marginalised in favour of an Aristotelian separation of temporal and spiritual authority. Islamic scholars, on the other hand, were heavily influenced by Plato's Republic , finding in the philosopher king a counterpart to the traditional figure of the \"lawgiver-prophet\". Al-Farabi , for example, followed Plato closely, writing that the ideal state was that which most carefully attended to the spiritual education of its citizens, and that its ruler must therefore have a highly developed understanding of the purpose of human existence. Where Al-Farabi departed from Plato was in asserting that the founder of the perfect state must not only be a philosopher but also a prophet, as the perfect law could only come from God. The founder's successors need not be prophets, but they must still be philosophers, able to correctly interpret and apply the received law. \n\nMedieval Islamic philosophers had many opportunities to put their political theories into practice, as they often held positions in the royal court, with many even serving as viziers . Despite their belief in the philosopher king ideal, no Islamic philosophers are known to have attempted to seize power for themselves, apparently being contented with a subservient position. Al-Farabi makes a concession to this state of affairs when he writes that, since rulers possessed of all the necessary virtues are rare, it is possible for the kingship of the ideal state to be shared between two people, \"one of whom is a philosopher and the other fulfils the remaining conditions\". \n\nThe translation into Hebrew of the works of Al-Farabi and Averroes saw the concept of the philosopher king enter into Jewish political thought. Biblical figures such as Moses , Abraham and Solomon were held up as examples of ideal rulers, with Plato's theory undergoing further distortions in order to meet the needs of Jewish philosophers. The popularity of the idea finally declined during the seventeenth century, as influential authors such as Baruch Spinoza began to formulate more secular political philosophies modelled on the works of Machiavelli . \n\nIt appears from the Republic that Plato did not think it impossible for his ideal state to be established in reality, and he did make one notable attempt to educate a ruler in the principles of philosophy. In 367 BC, Dionysius II came to power in Syracuse, Sicily , under the supervision of his uncle Dion , who was a friend and disciple of Plato. Dion invited Plato to Syracuse to serve as an advisor to Dionysius, and Plato accepted. However, he probably hoped for nothing more than to exercise a moderating influence on the tyrant; he is unlikely to have believed that he could transform Dionysius into a true philosopher king. In the event, Dionysius proved an unwilling student, and nothing came of the endeavor. \n\nLater, Dion attempted to seize power for himself, and was ultimately assassinated. In his possibly spurious Seventh Letter , Plato regretted Dion's death, and wrote that:\n\n...if he had got the supreme power, ... he would then by every means in his power have ordered aright the lives of his fellow-citizens by suitable and excellent laws; and the thing next in order, which he would have set his heart to accomplish, was to found again all the States of Sicily and make them free from the barbarians ... If these things had been accomplished by a man who was just and brave and temperate and a philosopher, the same belief with regard to virtue would have been established among the majority which, if Dionysios had been won over, would have been established, I might almost say, among all mankind and would have given them salvation. \n\nMany other historical figures have been put forward as potential examples of philosopher kings. According to W. K. C. Guthrie and others, Plato's friend Archytas may have been the original inspiration behind the concept. Not only was Archytas a distinguished Pythagorean philosopher, he was also a skilled military general and a popular political leader, serving seven terms as strategos in the city of Tarentum , Italy. \n\nAlexander the Great , as a student of Aristotle, has often been described as a philosopher king. His contemporary Onesicritus spoke of him as a \"philosopher in arms\", and the 1st-century Platonist Plutarch wrote in laudatory terms of his wisdom, generosity, temperance and courage. Plutarch's justification for calling Alexander a philosopher was that he had actualised principles which had previously only been spoken of as ideals and had \"changed the brutish customs of countless nations\". However, Alexander remains a controversial figure, as various historians have portrayed him very differently even into the modern day. \n\nRoman emperor Marcus Aurelius is also frequently cited as a fulfilment of the philosopher king ideal. Ancient sources such as the Historia Augusta call him \"the philosopher\" and praise him for the clemency of his reign, while his Stoic tome Meditations is still revered as a literary monument to a philosophy of service and duty. \n\nFurther examples include:",
  "An escalator is a moving staircase which carries people between floors of a building or structure. It consists of a motor -driven chain of individually linked steps on a track which cycle on a pair of tracks which keep the step tread horizontal.\n\nEscalators are often used around the world in places where lifts would be impractical, or they can be used in conjunction with them. Principal areas of usage include department stores , shopping malls , airports , transit systems (railway/railroad stations), convention centers , hotels , arenas , stadiums and public buildings.\n\nEscalators have the capacity to move large numbers of people. They have no waiting interval (except during very heavy traffic). They can be used to guide people toward main exits or special exhibits and may be weatherproofed for outdoor use. A non-functional escalator can function as a normal staircase, whereas many other methods of transport become useless when they break down or lose power.\n\nNathan Ames , a patent attorney from Saugus, Massachusetts , is credited with patenting the first \"escalator\" in 1859, even though no working model of his design was ever built. His invention, the \"revolving stairs\", is largely speculative and the patent specifications indicate that he had no preference for materials or potential use (he noted that steps could be upholstered or made of wood, and suggested that the units might benefit the infirm within a household use). The suggested motive power was either manual or hydraulic. \n\nIn 1889, Leamon Souder successfully patented the \"stairway\", an analogous device that featured a \"series of steps and links jointed to each other\". No model was ever built. This was the first of at least four escalator-style patents issued to Souder, including two for spiral designs. \n\nOn March 15, 1892, Jesse W. Reno patented the \"Endless Conveyor or Elevator.\" A few months after Reno's patent was approved, George A. Wheeler patented his ideas for a more recognizable moving staircase, though it was never built. Wheeler's patents were bought by Charles Seeberger ; some features of Wheeler's designs were incorporated in Seeberger's prototype that was built by the Otis Elevator Company in 1899. Reno , a graduate of Lehigh University , produced the first working escalator (called the \"inclined elevator\") and installed it alongside the Old Iron Pier at Coney Island , New York City in 1896. This particular device was little more than an inclined belt with cast-iron slats or cleats on the surface for traction, and traveled along a 25 degree incline. A few months later, the same prototype was used for a month-long trial period on the Manhattan side of the Brooklyn Bridge . Reno eventually joined forces with Otis and retired once he had sold his patents. Some Reno-type escalators were still being used in the Boston subway until construction for the Big Dig ( c. 1991 ) precipitated their removal. The Smithsonian Institution considered re-assembling one of these historic units from 1914 in their collection of Americana, but \"logistics and reassembly costs won out over nostalgia\", and the project was discarded. \n\nAround May 1895, Charles Seeberger began drawings on a form of escalator similar to those patented by Wheeler in 1892. This device consisted of flat, moving stairs, not unlike the escalators of today, except for one important detail: the step surface was smooth, with no comb effect to safely guide the rider's feet off at the ends. Instead, the passenger had to step off sideways. To facilitate this, at the top or bottom of the escalator the steps continued moving horizontally beyond the end of the handrail (like a miniature moving sidewalk) until they disappeared under a triangular \"divider\" which guided the passenger to either side. Seeberger teamed with Otis in 1899, and together they produced the first commercial escalator. It won first prize at the 1900 Paris Exposition Universelle . Also on display at the Exposition were Reno's inclined elevator, a similar model by James M. Dodge and the Link Belt Machinery Co., and two different devices by the French manufacturers Hallé and Piat.\n\nPiat installed its \"stepless\" escalator in Harrods Knightsbridge store on Wednesday, November 16, 1898, though the company relinquished its patent rights to the department store. Noted by Bill Lancaster in The Department Store: a Social History , \"customers unnerved by the experience were revived by shopmen dispensing free smelling salts and cognac.\" The Harrods unit was a continuous leather belt made of \"224 pieces... strongly linked together traveling in an upward direction\", and was the first \"moving staircase\" in England. \n\nHocquardt received European patent rights for the Fahrtreppe in 1906. After the Exposition , Hallé continued to sell its escalator device in Europe but was eventually eclipsed in sales by other major manufacturers.\n\nIn the first half of the twentieth century, several manufacturers developed their own escalator products, though they had to market their devices under different names, due to Otis’ hold on the trademark rights to the word \"escalator.\" New York -based Peelle Company called their models the Motorstair, while Westinghouse called their model an Electric Stairway. The Toledo -based Haughton Elevator company referred to their product as simply Moving Stairs. The Otis trademark is no longer in effect.\n\nKone and Schindler introduced their first escalator models several decades after the Otis Elevator Co., but grew to dominate the field over time. Today, Mitsubishi and ThyssenKrupp are Otis's primary rivals. Kone expanded internationally by acquisition in the 1970s, buying out Swedish elevator manufacturer Asea-Graham , and purchasing other minor French, German and Austrian elevator makers before assuming control of Westinghouse's European elevator business. As the last of the \"big four\" manufacturers to emerge onto the global market, Kone first acquired the Montgomery Elevator company, then took control of Germany's Orenstein & Koppel Rolltreppen . \n\nIn the twenty-first century Schindler became the largest maker of escalators and second largest maker of elevators in the world, though their first escalator installation did not occur until 1936. In 1979, the company entered the United States market by purchasing the Haughton Elevator company. A decade later, Schindler assumed control of the North American escalator/elevator operations of Westinghouse, forming Schindler's American division . \n\nNotable examples of historic escalators still in operation include:\n\nAuthors and historians have offered multiple interpretations of the source of the word \"escalator\", and some degree of misinformation then proliferated. For reference, contradictory citations by seven separate individuals, including the Otis Elevator Company itself, are provided below. \n\nSeeberger trademarked the word \"escalator\" in 1900, to coincide with his device's debut at the Exposition universelle . According to his own account, in 1895, his legal counsel advised him to name his new invention, and he then set out to devise a title for it. As evidenced in Seeberger's handwritten documents, the inventor consulted \"a Latin lexicon\" and \"adopted as the root of the new word, 'Scala'; as a prefix, 'E' and as a suffix, 'Tor.'\" His own rough translation of the word thus created was \"means of traversing from\", and he intended for the word to be pronounced / ɛ s ˈ k æ l ə t ɔːr / ( ess- KAL -ə-tor ). By 1906, Seeberger noted that the public had instead come to pronounce it / ˈ ɛ s k ə l eɪ t ɔːr / ( ess-kal- ATE -or ). \n\n\"Escalator\" was not a combination of other French or Greek words, and was never a derivative of \" elevator \" in the original sense, which means \"one who raises up, a deliverer\" in Latin. Similarly, the root word \" scala \" does not mean \"a flight of steps\", but is the singular form of the plural noun \" scalae \", which can denote any of: \"a flight of steps or stairs, a staircase; a ladder, [or] a scaling-ladder.\" \n\nThe alleged intended capitalization of \"escalator\" is likewise a topic of debate. Seeberger's trademark application lists the word not only with the \"E\", but also with all of the letters capitalized (in two different instances), and he specifies that \"any other form and character of type may be employed... without altering in any essential manner the character of [the] trade-mark.\" Otis Elevator Co. advertisements so frequently capitalized all of the letters in the word.\n\nIn 1950, the landmark case Haughton Elevator Co. v. Seeberger precipitated the end of Otis's exclusive reign over the word \"escalator\", and simultaneously created a cautionary study for companies and individuals interested in trademark retention. Confirming the contention of the Examiner of Trademark Interferences, Assistant Commissioner of Patents Murphy's decision rejected Otis’ appeal to keep their trademark intact, and noted that \"the term 'escalator' is recognized by the general public as the name for a moving stairway and not the source thereof\", observing that Otis had \"used the term as a generic descriptive term... in a number of patents which [had] been issued to them and... in their advertising matter.\" All trademark protections were removed from the word \"escalator\", the term was officially genericized, and it fell into the public domain .\n\nDesign factors include innovative technology, physical requirements, location, traffic patterns, safety considerations, and aesthetics. Physical factors such as the distance to be spanned determine the length and pitch of the escalator, while factors such as the infrastructure's ability to provide support and power must be considered. How upward and downward traffic is separated and load/unload areas are other important considerations.\n\nTemporal traffic patterns must be anticipated. Some escalators need only to move people from one floor to another, but others may have specific requirements, such as funneling visitors towards exits or exhibits. The visibility and accessibility of the escalator to traffic is relevant. Designers need to account for the projected traffic volumes. For example, a single-width escalator traveling at about 0.5 metres per second ( 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 ft/s) can move about 2000 people per hour, assuming that passengers ride single file. The carrying capacity of an escalator system is typically matched to the expected peak traffic demand. For example, escalators at transit stations must be designed to cater for the peak traffic flow discharged from a train, without excessive bunching at the escalator entrance. In this regard, escalators help manage the flow of people. For example, at many airports an unpaired escalator delivers passengers to an exit, with no means for anyone entering at the exit to access the concourse.\n\nEscalators are often built next to or around staircases that allow alternative travel between the same two floors. Elevators are necessary for disability access to floors serviced by escalators.\n\nEscalators typically rise at an angle of 30 or 35 degrees from the ground. They move at 0.3–0.9 metres per second (1–3 ft/s), like moving walkways , and may traverse vertical distances in excess of 18 metres (60 ft). Most modern escalators have single-piece aluminum or stainless steel steps that move on a system of tracks in a continuous loop.\n\nDifferent types of escalator planning include:\n\nMost countries require escalators to have moving handrails that keep pace with the movement of the steps as a safety measure. This helps riders steady themselves, especially when stepping onto the moving stairs. Occasionally a handrail moves at a slightly different speed from the steps, causing it to \"creep\" slowly forward or backward relative to the steps; it is only slippage and normal wear that causes such losses of synchronicity, and is not by design. \n\nThe direction of escalator movement (up or down) can be permanently set, controlled manually depending on the predominant flow of the crowd, or controlled automatically. In some setups, the direction is controlled by whoever arrives first. [ citation needed ]\n\nLanding platforms are the two platforms (at the two ends) that house the curved sections of the tracks, as well as the gears and motors that drive the stairs. The top platform usually contains the motor assembly and the main drive gear, while the bottom holds the return gear. These sections also anchor the ends of the escalator truss. Each platform also has a floor and a comb bearer. The floor plate provides a place for the passengers to stand before they step onto the moving stairs, flush with the rest of the floor and are removable to allow easy engineer access, while the comb bearer sits between the stationary floor plate and the moving step, so named for the cleats on its edge which mesh with the matching cleats on each step (and resemble a comb). The comb plates, which bolt to the comb bearer (usually 4 or 5 depending on the width of the machine), help to minimize the gap between the stairs and landing, preventing objects or persons from becoming caught in it. The comb bearer, depending on what brand of the escalator will push back and/or up and activate limit switches in the event of an impact of something that jams through combs (typically stones, screws & popcorn) can be someone's shoe/item loose clothing.\n\nThe truss is the hollow metal structure that bridges the lower and upper landings, composed of two side sections joined with cross braces across the bottom and just below the top. The ends of the truss are attached to the top and bottom landing platforms via steel or concrete supports. It carries all the straight track sections connecting the upper and lower sections.\n\nThe balustrade is composed of handrails, balustrade panels, and skirt panels. \n\nThe handrail provides a handhold for passengers while they are riding the escalator. The handrail is pulled along its own track by a chain that is connected to the main drive gear by a series of pulleys, keeping it at the same speed as the steps. Four distinct sections make up the rail: at its center is a \"slider\", also known as a \"glider ply\", which is a layer of a cotton or synthetic textile that allows the rail to move smoothly along its track. The \" tension member \" lies on the slider and consists of either steel cable or flat steel tape, providing the handrail with tensile strength and flexibility. The inner components, on top of the tension member, are made of chemically treated rubber designed to prevent the layers from separating. Finally, the outer layer—the part that passengers see—is the cover, typically a blend of synthetic polymers and rubber. Covers are designed to resist degradation from environmental conditions, mechanical wear and tear and vandalism. In a factory, handrails are constructed by feeding rubber through an extrusion machine to produce layers of the required size and type in order to match specific orders. The component layers of fabric, rubber and steel are shaped by workers before being fed into the presses which fuse them together. In the mid-twentieth century, some handrail designs consisted of a rubber bellows, with rings of smooth metal cladding called \"bracelets\" between each coil. This gave the handrail a rigid yet flexible feel. Additionally, each bellows section was no more than around a metre long, so if part of the handrail was damaged, only the bad segment needed to be replaced. These forms of handrail have largely been replaced with fabric-and-rubber railings. Being made of either metal, sandwich panel , or glass, the balustrade panel supports the handrails of the escalator. It also provides additional protection for the handrail and passengers. Some escalators have direction arrows on the ends of the balustrade. Escalators' on/off buttons are frequently located at the ends of the balustrade. Moving walkways often use balustrades in the same way. The bottom of the balustrade is called a skirt panel. It is notorious in this art for being a frequent site of injuries and failures, due to the possible entrapment of materials (including body parts) in the machinery. Multiple solutions have been suggested for this issue, including coating with a low-friction material, employing bristles, and others. \n\nThe track system is built into the truss to guide the step chain, which continuously pulls the steps from the bottom platform and back to the top in an endless loop. One track guides the front wheels of the steps (called the step-wheel track) and another guides the back wheels of the steps (called the trailer-wheel track). The relative positions of these tracks cause the steps to form a staircase as they move out from under the comb plate. Along the straight section of the truss the tracks are at their maximum distance apart. This configuration forces the back of one step to be at a 90-degree angle relative to the step behind it. This right angle forces the steps into a shape resembling a staircase. At the top and bottom of the escalator, the two tracks converge so that the front and back wheels of the steps are almost in a straight line. This causes the stairs to lay in a flat sheetlike arrangement, one after another, so they can easily travel around the bend in the curved section of track. The tracks carry the steps down along the underside of the truss until they reach the bottom landing, where they pass through another curved section of track before exiting the bottom landing. At this point, the tracks separate and the steps once again assume a staircase configuration. This cycle is repeated continually as the steps are pulled from bottom to top and back to the bottom again.\n\nThe steps themselves are solid, one piece, die-cast aluminium or steel. Yellow demarcation lines are sometimes added to indicate their edges. In most escalator models manufactured after 1950, both the riser and the tread of each step is cleated (given a ribbed appearance) with comb-like protrusions that mesh with the comb plates on the top and bottom platforms and the succeeding steps in the chain. Seeberger escalators featured flat treads and smooth risers; other escalator models have cleated treads and smooth risers. The steps are linked by a continuous metal chain that forms a closed loop. The front and back edges of the steps each have two wheels, the rear of which are set further apart and fit into the trailer-wheel track while the front set have narrower axles and fit the step-wheel track.\n\nJesse Reno also designed the first escalators installed in any underground subway system in the form of a helical escalator at Holloway Road tube station in London in 1906. The experimental device never saw public use and its remains are now in the London Transport Museum 's depot in Acton . \n\nAlthough the first fully operational spiral escalator, Reno's design was nonetheless only one in a series of similar proposed contraptions. Souder patented two helical designs, while Wheeler drafted helical stairway plans in 1905. Seeberger devised at least two helical designs between 1906 and 1911 (including an unrealized arrangement for the London Underground), and Gilbert Luna obtained West German, Japanese, and United States patents for his version of a spiral escalator by 1973. When interviewed for the Los Angeles Times that year, Luna was in the process of soliciting major firms for the acquisition of his patents and company, but statistics are unclear on the outcome of these endeavors. Karl-Heinz Pahl received a European and a US patent for a spiral escalator in 1992. \n\nThe Mitsubishi Electric Corporation was most successful in its development of spiral or helical escalators, and it alone has sold them since the mid-1980s. The world's first practical spiral escalator—a Mitsubishi model—was installed in Osaka , Japan, in 1985. Helixator, an experimental helical escalator design that currently exists as a prototype scale model, could further reduce floor space demands. Its design has several innovations that allow a continuous helix; driven by a linear motor instead of a chain system, it spreads force evenly along the escalator path, avoiding excessive force on the top chain links and hence avoiding the geometry, length, and height limits of standard escalators. San Francisco Centre , San Francisco, California, United States, is the first spiral escalator in the Western Hemisphere. \n\nLevytator, a design originating at City University in London, can move in straight lines or curves with or without rising or descending. The returning steps do not move underneath the in-use steps: rather, they provide steps for travel in the opposite direction, as in the Pahl spiral escalator patent. \n\nSafety is a major concern in escalator design, as escalators are powerful machines that can become entangled with clothing and other items. Such entanglements can injure or kill riders. In India many women wear saris , increasing the likelihood of entangling the clothing's loose end. To prevent this, sari guards are built into most escalators in India.\n\nChildren wearing footwear such as Crocs and flip-flops are especially at risk of being caught in escalator mechanisms. The softness of the shoe's material combined with the smaller size of children's feet makes this sort of accident especially common. \n\nEscalators sometimes include fire protection systems including automatic fire detection and suppression systems within the dust collection and engineer pit. To limit the danger caused by overheating, spaces that contain motors and gears typically include additional ventilation. Small, targeted clean agent automatic extinguishing systems are sometimes installed in these areas. Fire protection of an escalator floor opening is also sometimes provided by adding automatic sprinklers or fireproof shutters to the opening, or by installing the escalator in an enclosed fire-protected space.\n\nThe King's Cross fire of 1987 illustrated the demanding nature of escalator upkeep and the devices' propensity to collect \"fluff\" and other small debris when not properly maintained. The official inquiry determined that the fire started slowly, smoldering virtually undetected for a time, and then exploded into the ticket hall above in a previously unrecognised phenomenon now known as the \" trench effect \". In the escalators' undercarriage, approximately 8,800 kilograms (19,400 lb) of accumulated detritus acted as a wick to a neglected buildup of interior lubricants; wood veneers, paper and plastic advertisements, solvent-based paint, plywood in the ticket hall, and melamine combustion added to the impact of the calamity. Following the report, older wooden escalators were removed from service in the London Underground . Additionally, sections of the London Underground that were actually below ground were made non-smoking ; ultimately, the whole system became a smoke-free zone.\n\nSome of longest and fastest escalators in Europe are found in Prague , and are set to be replaced with slower versions in order to meet modern safety standards. \n\nIn the 1930s, at least one suit was filed against a department store, alleging that its escalators posed an attractive nuisance , responsible for a child's injury. \n\nDespite their considerable scope, the two Congressional Acts regarding accessibility (the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) ) did not directly affect escalators or their public installations. Since Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act included public transportation systems, for a few years, the United States Department of Transportation considered designs to retrofit existing escalators for wheelchair access. Nonetheless, Foster-Miller Associates ' 1980 plan, Escalator Modification for the Handicapped was ultimately ignored in favor of increased elevator installations in subway systems. Likewise, the ADA provided more accessibility options, but expressly excluded escalators as \"accessible means of egress\", advocating neither their removal nor their retention in public structures. \n\nIn the United States and Canada, new escalators must abide by ASME A17.1 standards, and old/historic escalators must conform to the safety guidelines of ASME A17.3. In Europe, the escalator safety code is EN 115.\n\nIn most major countries, the expectation is that escalator users wishing to stand keep to one side to allow others to climb past them on the other. Due to historical design purposes, riders in Canada, Germany, Hong Kong, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, France and the United States are expected to stand on the right and walk on the left. However, in Australia and New Zealand, the opposite is the case. Practice may differ from city to city within countries: in Osaka , riders stand on the right, whereas in Tokyo (and most other Japanese cities), riders stand on the left. \n\nIn certain high-traffic systems, including the East Japan Railway Company and the Prague metro , escalator users are encouraged to stand on whichever side they choose, with the aim of preventing wear and tear and asymmetrical burdening. All Tokyo metro stations also have posters next to the escalators that ask users not to walk but instead to stand on either side.\n\nThe practice of standing on one side and walking on the other may cause uneven wear on escalator mechanisms. \n\nTransport for London trialed standing on both sides (no walking) for a period of several months in 2016. This increased capacity and eliminated queues approaching the escalator during peak travel times. A follow-up report was released several months later with no recommendation to continue the practice. ",
  "La Méditerranéenne , previously known as Tour Méditerranéen , was a professional road bicycle racing event held in Spain, France and Italy, close to the Mediterranean. Run over four days, it holds a 2.1 rating on the UCI Europe Tour . \n\nThe event is part of a series of stage races being held in the south of France in February, alongside the Étoile de Bessèges , the Tour du Haut Var and the Tour La Provence . These early-season races are competed mainly by French teams and are considered preparations for Paris–Nice , the first European World Tour event in March. \n\nThe Tour Méditerranéen (\"Tour of the Mediterranean Sea\") was created by former Tour de France winner Lucien Aimar in 1974. The event was named Trophée Méditerranéen for its first four editions. Run in February, the five-day stage race was won by several eminent riders, including Eddy Merckx , Gianni Bugno , Tony Rominger , Laurent Jalabert and Paolo Bettini . Gerrie Knetemann holds the record with three victories. \n\nIn 2012 licensing problems between the organizers and the French Cycling Federation emerged, nearly spelling the cancellation of the event before a deal was ultimately reached. Financial difficulties led to the discontinuation of the race in 2015 after organizers failed to pay debts from the previous edition. \n\nIn 2016 the race was revived as La Méditerranéenne and scaled back to four days. The rejuvenated edition was won by Ukrainian Andriy Hrivko . \n\nFrom 1974 until 2014 the race was held in the southern French region of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur , but also occasionally featured stages in Liguria , Italy. Traditionally, a summit finish on the Mont Faron in Toulon was staged every year. As from 2016, the re-invented La Méditerranéenne is contested over four days. The 2016 edition spanned three countries, starting with a team time trial in Banyoles , Spain, before heading into France for two stages close to the Mediterranean coast . The final stage started and finished in Bordighera , on the Italian riviera . ",
  "Boxer Protocol\n\nThe Boxer Protocol was a diplomatic protocol signed in China's capital Beijing on September 7, 1901, between the Qing Empire of China and the Eight-Nation Alliance that had provided military forces (including France, Germany, United Kingdom, Italy, Austria-Hungary, Japan, Russia, and the United States) as well as Belgium, Spain, and the Netherlands, after China's defeat in the intervention to put down the Boxer Rebellion . The protocol is regarded as one of China's unequal treaties .\n\nThe 1901 protocol is commonly known as the Boxer Protocol or Peace Agreement between the Great Powers and China in English. It is known as the Xinchou Treaty : 16 or Beijing protocol in Chinese , where \"Xinchou\" refers to the year (1901) of signature under the sexagenary cycle system. The full English name of the protocol is Austria-Hungary, Belgium, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Russia, Spain, United States and China – Final Protocol for the Settlement of the Disturbances of 1900 , reflecting its nature as a diplomatic protocol rather than a peace treaty at the time of signature.\n\nThe Qing dynasty was by no means completely defeated when the Allies took control of the capital Beijing . The Allies had to temper the demands they sent in a message to Xi'an to get the Empress Dowager Cixi to agree with them; for instance, China did not have to give up any land. Many of the Dowager Empress' advisers in the Imperial Court insisted that the war continue against the foreigners, arguing that China could defeat them since it was the disloyal and traitorous people within China who allowed Beijing and Tianjin to be captured by the Allies, and the interior of China was impenetrable. The Dowager was practical and decided that the terms were generous enough for her to acquiesce and stop the war when she was assured of her continued reign. \n\nThe Boxer Protocol was signed on September 7, 1901, in the Spanish Legation in Beijing. Signatories included: \n\nand\n\n450 million taels of fine silver (around 18,000 tonnes, worth approx. US$ 333 million or £ 67 million at the exchange rates of the time) were to be paid as indemnity over 39 years to the eight nations involved. \n\nThe Chinese paid the indemnity in gold on a rising scale with a 4% interest charge until the debt was amortized on December 31, 1940. After 39 years, the amount was almost 1 billion taels (precisely 982,238,150), or ≈1,180,000,000 troy ounces (37,000 tonnes) at 1.2 ozt/tael.\n\nThe sum was to be distributed as follows: Russia 28.97%, Germany 20.02%, France 15.75%, Britain 11.25%, Japan 7.73%, United States 7.32%, Italy 7.32%, Belgium 1.89%, Austria-Hungary 0.89%, Netherlands 0.17%, Spain 0.03%, Portugal 0.02%, Sweden and Norway 0.01%. \n\nThe French Catholic vicar apostolic, Msgr. Alfons Bermyn, wanted foreign troops garrisoned in Inner Mongolia , but the governor refused. Bermyn resorted to lies and falsely petitioned the Manchu Enming to send troops to Hetao , where Prince Duan's Mongol troops and General Dong Fuxiang's Muslim troops allegedly threatened Catholics. It turned out that Bermyn had created the incident as a hoax. One of the false reports claimed that Dong Fuxiang wiped out Belgian missionaries in Mongolia and was going to massacre Catholics in Taiyuan. \n\nThe Qing did not capitulate to all foreign demands. The Manchu Governor Yuxian was executed, but the Imperial court refused to execute the Chinese General Dong Fuxiang , although both were anti-foreign and had been accused of encouraging the killing of foreigners during the rebellion. Instead, General Dong Fuxiang lived a life of luxury and power in \"exile\" in his home province of Gansu. \n\nIn addition to sparing Dong Fuxiang, the Qing refused to exile the Boxer supporter Prince Zaiyi to Xinjiang, as the foreigners demanded. Instead, he moved to Alashan, west of Ningxia , and lived in the residence of the local Mongol prince. He then moved to Ningxia during the Xinhai Revolution when the Muslims took control of Ningxia, and finally moved to Xinjiang with Sheng Yun. Prince Duan \"went no farther than Manchuria for exile, and was heard of there in 1908\". \n\nOn December 28, 1908, the United States remitted $11,961,121.76 of its share of the Indemnity to support the education of Chinese students in the United States and the construction of Tsinghua University in Beijing, thanks to the efforts of the Chinese ambassador Liang Cheng . \n\nWhen China declared war on Germany and Austria in 1917, it suspended the combined German and Austrian share of the Boxer Indemnity, which totaled 20.91 percent. At the Paris Peace Conference , Beijing succeeded in completely revoking the German and Austrian shares of the Boxer Indemnity. \n\nThe history surrounding Russia's share of the Boxer Indemnity is the most complex of all the nations involved. On December 2, 1918, the Bolsheviks issued an official decree abolishing Russia's share of the Indemnity (146). Upon the arrival of Lev Karakhan in Beijing during the fall of 1923, however, it became clear that the Soviet Union expected to retain control over how the Russian share was to be spent. Though Karakhan was initially hesitant to follow the United States' example of directing the funds toward education, he soon insisted in private that the Russian share had to be used for that purpose and, during February 1924, presented a proposal stating that the \"Soviet portion of the Boxer Indemnity would be allocated to Chinese educational institutions.\" On March 14, 1924, Karakhan completed a draft Sino-Soviet agreement stating, \"The government of the USSR agrees to renounce the Russian portion of the Boxer Indemnity.\" Copies of these terms were published in the Chinese press, and the positive public reaction encouraged other countries to match the USSR's terms. On May 21, 1924, the U.S. Congress agreed to remit the final $6,137,552.90 of the American share to China. Ten days later, however, it became apparent that the USSR did not intend to carry through on its earlier promise of full renunciation. When the final Sino-Soviet agreement was announced, it specified that Russia's share would be used to promote education in China and that the Soviet government would retain control over how the money was to be used, an exact parallel to the U.S. remittance of 1908. \n\nOn March 3, 1925, Great Britain completed arrangements to use its share of the Boxer Indemnity to support railway construction in China. On April 12, France asked that its indemnity be used to reopen a defunct Sino-French Bank. Italy signed an agreement on October 1 to spend its share on the construction of steel bridges. The Netherlands' share paid for harbor and land reclamation. The Netherlands also used its indemnity for the establishment of the Sinological Institute at Leiden University . The Belgian funds were earmarked to be spent on railway material in Belgium. Finally, Japan's indemnity was transferred to develop aviation in China under Japanese oversight. Once these countries' approximately 40 percent of the Boxer Indemnity was added to Germany's and Austria's combined 20.9 percent, the United States' 7.3 percent, and the Soviet Union's 29.0 percent share, the Beijing government had accounted for over 98 percent of the entire Boxer Indemnity. Hence, by 1927, Beijing had almost entirely revoked Boxer Indemnity payments abroad and successfully redirected the payments for use within China. ",
  "A student publication is a media outlet such as a newspaper , magazine , television show , or radio station produced by students at an educational institution. These publications typically cover local and school-related news, but they may also report on national or international news as well. Most student publications are either part of a curricular class or run as an extracurricular activity. \n\nStudent publications serve as both a platform for community discussion and a place for those interested in journalism to develop their skills. These publications report news, publish opinions of students and faculty, and may run advertisements catered to the student body. Besides these purposes, student publications also serve as a watchdog to uncover problems at the respective institution. The majority of student publications are funded through their educational institution. Some funds may be generated through sales and advertisements, but the majority usually comes from the school itself. Because of this, educational institutions have specific ways in which they can influence the publications through funding. \n\nDue to the rise in adoption of Internet accessible devices such as computers and smartphones, many high schools and colleges have begun offering online editions of their publications in addition to printed copies. The first student newspaper in the United States to completely abandon its printed issues in favor of a website was The Campus Lantern at Eastern Connecticut State University , [ citation needed ] doing so in the 2000s; however paper issues of The Lantern have since been brought back. Due to publishing content online, student publications are now able to reach a much wider audience than before. With many student publications moving to online, content is more accessible to the student body and production of the content is easier and cheaper. As printed student publications become more and more scarce and student publications move online to best fit the news needs of today's students, student newspapers will run into several issues. One of these issues is the increase in demand for new content. While an update once a day or even once a week was once acceptable for a student publication, real time information resources will soon be demanded by students who grew up with constant updates of news coverage. This shift in content demand will require more effort and more time by the student newspaper staff.\n\nOne of these issues is what is called the \"daily me.\" Coined by Cass Sunstein in his book Republic.com, the \"daily me\" is the current trend of online readers looking for personalized information providers. In this way the reader deals with only the subjects they wish to deal with. In this way readers are not inconvenienced by material they have no interest in and can personalize an information product themselves, providing added value to both themselves and the provider. However, some believe this trend may not be the best for society, who is now faced with a public that chooses how well to be informed. On a campus paper, this trend will likely manifest itself in the increased number of \"hits\" to the common \"sports\" and \"opinion\" sections of the paper, while hard news sections go un-noticed. This new type of print culture could possibly result in drastic formatting and content changes for student newspapers. \n\nUniversity student newspapers in Australia are usually independent of university administration yet are connected with or run by the student representative organisation operating at the campus. Editors tend to be elected by the student body on a separate ticket to other student representatives and are paid an honorarium, although some student organisations have been known to employ unelected staff to coordinate the production of the newspaper (an example of this is the national Student View newspaper).\n\nAustralian student newspapers have courted controversy since their inception. One of the more notorious of these controversies involved the publication of an article which allegedly incited readers to shoplift. The July edition of the magazine was banned by the Office of Film and Literature Classification following a campaign by conservative talkback radio hosts and other media to have the material banned. The four editors of the July 1995 edition of La Trobe University student magazine Rabelais were subsequently charged with publishing, distributing and depositing an objectionable publication. An objectional publication was defined in this case, as one that incites criminal activity. The editors lodged an appeal, which led to a protracted four-year court case. The appeal was eventually defeated by the full bench of the Federal Court , who refused the editors' application to appeal to the High Court of Australia . The charges were eventually dropped in March 1999.\n\nMany student newspapers in Canada are independent from their universities and student unions. Such autonomous papers are funded by student fees won by referendums, as well as advertising, and are run by their staffs, with no faculty input.\n\nAbout 55 of Canada's student newspapers belong to a co-operative and newswire service called the Canadian University Press , which holds conferences, has correspondents across the country, is run democratically by its member papers, and fosters a sense of community among Canadian student journalists.\n\nThe oldest continually published student newspapers in Canada are The Varsity (1880), The Queen's Journal (1873), and The Dalhousie Gazette (1868). The oldest student publication in Canada is The Brunswickan , which was founded in 1867 as a monthly but then switched to a weekly newspaper.\n\nThe only Canadian student newspaper that continues to print on a daily schedule is The Gazette at the University of Western Ontario.\n\nStudent publications are produced at Ireland 's universities and Institutes of Technology as well as to a lesser extent at Colleges of Further Education. These publications include The College Tribune and The University Observer at University College Dublin , Trinity News and The University Times at Trinity College Dublin , The College View based at Dublin City University and Sin Newspaper at NUI Galway . Other publications include The Edition (stylised as the eDITion), at Dublin Institute of Technology and the UCC Express and Motley Magazine at University College Cork .\n\nEach publication reports on affairs at its host university and on local, national and international news of relevance to students and many student journalists have gone on to work in Ireland's national press. All student publications in Ireland are funded by or linked to their host university or its students' union, with the exception of UCD's College Tribune which operates independently. Irish student publications are invited each year to enter the national Student Media Awards, run by a Dublin-based marketing firm Oxygen.ie under various categories.\n\nAlmost every university in South Korea runs a student based press. Although many of these press are funded by the school, the students press has a significant amount of say amongst the student body.\n\nStudent newspapers in the United Kingdom are often given a constitutionally guaranteed editorial independence from the universities and students' unions whose students they represent, although the majority are financially dependent on their students' union. Notable British student newspapers that are financially as well as editorially independent from their respective student unions are Cherwell ( Oxford Student Publications Ltd ), Varsity (Varsity Publications Ltd; Cambridge), The Tab (Tab Media Ltd; national) and The Gown ( Queen's University Belfast ).\n\nIn 2003, The National Student , the UK's first independent national student newspaper, was launched (closed 2019). Scotcampus a similar publication based in Scotland was founded in 2001 (closed 2016). In 2009, The Student Journals was founded as an independent online magazine for students, but started allowing international writers one year after launch (closed 2014).\n\nStudent publications include United States High School newspapers, such as Tattler (student newspaper) , Berkeley High Jacket , The Spectator (Stuyvesant High School) , The Exonian , and The Classic (newspaper) .\n\nTinker v. Des Moines concerns a group of students who wanted to wear black armbands to school in 1965 to protest United States involvement in Vietnam . After school officials heard about the planned silent protest, they suspended the students involved. A few of the students involved sued and the Supreme Court sided with the students, saying that provided that these speech acts did not distract themselves or others from academic work, the real purpose of the school, then students were free to wear and say want they liked in school. This is considered the benchmark case in issues of student free speech and contains the famous phrase \"students do not shed their constitutional rights at the schoolhouse gate.\" \n\nHazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier , heard by the United States Supreme Court in 1987 concerned a public school newspaper that attempted to print two controversial stories about issues of teen pregnancy and divorced families. It was the custom of the principal to look over the proposed paper before publication. With little time left before the publication deadline, the principal decided that the two stories, though names had been changed to protect the stories' subjects, were inappropriate for the paper's younger readers; under direction of the principal, the paper was printed without the offending stories. The students filed suit, but the Supreme Court stood by the principal's ruling, that, because of time constraints, the only proper course of action was to not print the stories. It was decided that the students' First Amendment rights had not been infringed. This case is often cited by high schools and universities to support the custom of prior review. \n\nHazelwood and Tinker offer conflicting versions of student free expression. Student-directed publications may indeed be considered open or limited public forums for student expression, offering students freedom of expression under both Hazelwood and Tinker .\n\nHazelwood , for example, does not say administrators must review or censor their papers before publication. In fact, journalism education organizations, like the Journalism Education Association , argue that prior review has no legitimate educational merit and is only a tool leading to censorship.\n\nUnder certain limited conditions and situations presented by Hazelwood , school administrators may be permitted prior review of (mostly high school) student publications.\n\nUntil June 2005, the Hazelwood standard was not considered to apply to public college and university newspapers, a decision most recently affirmed in the 2001 appeals court decision in Kincaid v. Gibson . However, in June 2005, the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled, in Hosty v. Carter , that the Hazelwood standard could apply to student publications that were not \"designated public forums,\" and in February 2006 the Supreme Court declined to hear the students' appeal. At this time [ when? ] , the Hosty decision applies only in the states of Illinois , Indiana and Wisconsin .\n\nIn response to the Kincaid decision, the California State Legislature passed AB 2581 , which extended existing state-level statutory protection of high school student journalists to college and university students. The bill was signed into law by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and took effect on January 1, 2007.\n\nControversy over alleged censorship actions has led some student newspapers to become independent organizations, such as The Exponent of Purdue University in 1969, The Daily Californian of the University of California, Berkeley in 1971, The Daily Orange of Syracuse University in 1971, The Independent Florida Alligator of the University of Florida in 1973, The Cavalier Daily of the University of Virginia in 1979, The Paisano of the University of Texas at San Antonio in 1981, and The Mountaineer Jeffersonian of West Virginia University in 2008.\n\nSome states have laws which enhance the U.S. Constitution in protecting student expression documented by the Student Press Law Center .\n\nUniversity administrations have learned to get around constitutional protections and effectively diminish critical student newspapers by following the example of former Boston University President John Silber , who on the advice of Harvard Law School Professor Alan Dershowitz , eliminated all funding for student newspapers in the 1970s in an attempt to suppress on-campus criticism. Silber's policy went so far as to ban student organizations funded by the university from placing advertisements in the student press. With his hands-off policy, Silber was able to eliminate the independence of The Daily News and financially crippled the more-radical b.u. exposure . The exposure sued Silber and the university for infringement of their First Amendment rights, but the courts of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts eventually dismissed their case.\n\nStudies by the Journal of Blacks in Higher Education ( JBHE ) focusing on African American students have found that as few as 2.6% of editors of all student newspapers are of African-American descent, with other minorities showing similar trending. These numbers are not much higher at schools with credited journalism schools. In these institutions, only 4.4% of editors are of African American descent. Both of these percentages are significantly below the percentage of population African-Americans make up in the total United States. Such skewed demographics in these publications could result in newspapers that only reflect the outlooks and values of a particular segment of the student population. The JBHE did not suggest any type of affirmative action program for student publications at the study's release in 2004. ",
  "An obelisk ( / ˈ ɒ b ə l ɪ s k / ; from Ancient Greek ὀβελίσκος ( obelískos ) , diminutive of ὀβελός ( obelós ) ' spit , nail, pointed pillar') is a tall, slender, tapered monument with four sides and a pyramidal or pyramidion top. Originally constructed by Ancient Egyptians and called tekhenu , the Greeks used the Greek term obeliskos to describe them, and this word passed into Latin and ultimately English . Though William Thomas used the term correctly in his Historie of Italie of 1549, by the late sixteenth century (after reduced contact with Italy following the excommunication of Queen Elizabeth), Shakespeare failed to distinguish between pyramids and obelisks in his plays and sonnets. Ancient obelisks are monolithic and consist of a single stone; most modern obelisks are made of several stones. \n\nObelisks were prominent in the architecture of the ancient Egyptians , and played a vital role in their religion placing them in pairs at the entrance of the temples . The word \"obelisk\" as used in English today is of Greek rather than Egyptian origin because Herodotus , the Greek traveler, was one of the first classical writers to describe the objects. A number of ancient Egyptian obelisks are known to have survived, plus the \" unfinished obelisk \" found partly hewn from its quarry at Aswan . These obelisks are now dispersed around the world, and fewer than half of them remain in Egypt.\n\nThe earliest temple obelisk still in its original position is the 68-foot (20.7 m) 120- metric-ton (130- short-ton ) red granite Obelisk of Senusret I of the Twelfth Dynasty at Al-Matariyyah in modern Heliopolis . \n\nIn Egyptian mythology , the obelisk symbolized the sun god Ra , and during the religious reformation of Akhenaten it was said to have been a petrified ray of the Aten , the sundisk. Benben was the mound that arose from the primordial waters Nu upon which the creator god Atum settled in the creation story of the Heliopolitan creation myth form of Ancient Egyptian religion. The Benben stone (also known as a pyramidion ) is the top stone of the Egyptian pyramid. It is also related to the obelisk.\n\nBoth New York University Egyptologist Patricia Blackwell Gary and Astronomy senior editor Richard Talcott hypothesize that the shapes of the ancient Egyptian pyramid and obelisk were derived from natural phenomena associated with the sun (the sun-god Ra being the Egyptians' greatest deity at that time). The pyramid and obelisk's significance have been previously overlooked, especially the astronomical phenomena connected with sunrise and sunset : Zodiacal light and sun pillars respectively.\n\nAncient Nubian kings of the twenty-fifth Dynasty sought to legitimize their rule over Egypt by constructing Egyptianizing monuments in the Middle Nile region. Historical sources mention that king Piye built at least one obelisk. The obelisk was made of local black granite and was found at the site of Kadakol. It had been cut down to make it into a column, presumably for one of the early Christian churches in the area of Old Dongola . Today the obelisk is exhibited in the National Museum in Khartoum . The obelisk is inscribed with the kings official titulary: Strong-bull, Appearing-in-Dominion (Thebes), King-of-Upper-and-Lower-Egypt, Two-ladies, Ruler-of-Egypt, Son-of-Rê, Pi(ankh)y: what he made as his monument for his father Amen-Rê, lord of [...] . \n\nAn obelisk of King Senkamanisken was found at Gebel Barkal in 1916 by the Harvard University Museum of Fine Arts expedition to Sudan . There are remains of another small obelisk inscribed with the cartouche of King Aktisanes at the site of Gebel Barkal. \n\nAround 30 BCE, Rome seized control of Egypt and looted the various temple complexes; in one case they destroyed walls at the Temple of Karnak to haul them out. There are now more than twice as many obelisks that were seized and shipped out by Rome as remain in Egypt. The majority were dismantled during the Roman period over 1,700 years ago and the obelisks were sent to different locations. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe largest standing and tallest Egyptian obelisk is the Lateran Obelisk in the square at the west side of the Lateran Basilica in Rome at 105.6 feet (32.2 m) tall and a weight of 455 metric tons (502 short tons). More well known is the iconic 25 metres (82 ft), 331-metric-ton (365-short-ton) Vatican obelisk at Saint Peter's Square . Brought to Rome by the Emperor Caligula in 37 CE, it has stood at its current site and on the wall of the Circus of Nero , flanking St Peter's Basilica.\n\nThe elder Pliny in his Natural History refers to the obelisk's transportation from Egypt to Rome by order of the Emperor Gaius (Caligula) as an outstanding event. The barge that carried it had a huge mast of fir wood which four men's arms could not encircle. One hundred and twenty bushels of lentils were needed for ballast. Having fulfilled its purpose, the gigantic vessel was no longer wanted. Therefore, filled with stones and cement, it was sunk to form the foundations of the foremost quay of the new harbour at Ostia . \n\nPope Sixtus V was determined to erect the obelisk in front of St Peter's, of which the nave was yet to be built. He had a full-sized wooden mock-up erected within months of his election. Domenico Fontana , the assistant of Giacomo Della Porta in the Basilica's construction, presented the Pope with a little model crane of wood and a heavy little obelisk of lead, which Sixtus himself was able to raise by turning a little winch with his finger. Fontana was given the project. Half-buried in the debris of the ages, it was first excavated as it stood; then it took from 30 April to 17 May 1586 to move it on rollers to the Piazza: it required nearly 1000 men, 140 carthorses, and 47 cranes. The re-erection, scheduled for 14 September, the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross , was watched by a large crowd. It was a famous feat of engineering, which made the reputation of Fontana, who detailed it in a book illustrated with copperplate etchings, Della Trasportatione dell'Obelisco Vaticano et delle Fabriche di Nostro Signore Papa Sisto V (1590), which itself set a new standard in communicating technical information and influenced subsequent architectural publications by its meticulous precision. Before being re-erected the obelisk was exorcised. It is said that Fontana had teams of relay horses to make his getaway if the enterprise failed. When Carlo Maderno came to build the Basilica's nave, he had to put the slightest kink in its axis, to line it precisely with the obelisk.\n\nThree more obelisks were erected in Rome under Sixtus V: at Santa Maria Maggiore , in 1587; at the Lateran Basilica, in 1588; and at the Piazza del Popolo , in 1589. An obelisk stands in front of the church of Trinità dei Monti , at the head of the Spanish Steps . Other notable Egyptian obelisks in Rome are found in Piazza della Minerva , sculpted while being carried on the back of an elephant , Piazza Montecitorio , Piazza della Rotonda , the Baths of Diocletian , and Villa Celimontana . Rome lost one of its obelisks, the Boboli obelisk which had decorated the temple of Isis, where it was uncovered in the 16th century. The Medici claimed it for the Villa Medici , but in 1790 they moved it to the Boboli Gardens attached to the Palazzo Pitti in Florence , and left a replica in its place.\n\nNot all the Egyptian obelisks in the Roman Empire were set up at Rome: Herod the Great imitated his Roman patrons and set up an obelisk, Caesarea obelisk , made out of Egyptian red granite in the hippodrome of his new city Caesarea in northern Judea . This one is about 40 feet (12 m) tall and weighs about 100 metric tons (110 short tons). It was discovered by archaeologists and has been re-erected at its former site.\n\nIn 357 CE, Emperor Constantius II had two Karnak Temple obelisks removed and transported down the Nile to Alexandria to commemorate his ventennalia , the 20th year of his reign. Afterward, one was sent to Rome and erected on the spina of the Circus Maximus , and is today known as the Lateran Obelisk. The other one, known as the Obelisk of Theodosius , remained in Alexandria until 390 CE, when Emperor Theodosius I had it transported to Constantinople (now Istanbul ) and put up on the spina of the Hippodrome of Constantinople (now Sultan Ahmet Square). It once stood 95 feet (29 m) tall and weighed 380 metric tons (420 short tons); however, its lower section (which reputedly also once stood in the hippodrome) is now lost, reducing the obelisk's size to 65 feet (20 m). \n\nThe Ancient Romans populated their city with 8 large and 42 small Egyptian obelisks. More have been re-erected elsewhere, and the best-known examples outside Rome are the pair of 21-metre (69 ft) 187-metric-ton (206-short-ton) Cleopatra's Needles in London, England (21 metres or 69 feet), and New York City, US (21 metres or 70 feet), and the 23-metre (75 ft) over-250-metric-ton (280-short-ton) Luxor Obelisk at the Place de la Concorde in Paris, France . \n\nObelisks were being shipped out of Egypt as late as the nineteenth century when three of them were sent to London , New York and Paris . Their transportation was covered by various newspapers. \n\nObelisk monuments are also known from the Assyrian civilization, where they were erected as public monuments that commemorated the achievements of the Assyrian king.\n\nThe British Museum possesses four Assyrian obelisks:\n\nThe White Obelisk of Ashurnasirpal I (named due to its colour), was discovered by Hormuzd Rassam in 1853 at Nineveh . The obelisk was erected by either Ashurnasirpal I (1050–1031 BCE) or Ashurnasirpal II (883–859 BCE). The obelisk bears an inscription that refers to the king's seizure of goods, people and herds, which he carried back to the city of Ashur. The reliefs of the Obelisk depict military campaigns, hunting, victory banquets and scenes of tribute bearing.\n\nThe Rassam Obelisk, named after its discoverer Hormuzd Rassam , was found on the citadel of Nimrud (ancient Kalhu). It was erected by Ashurnasirpal II, though only survives in fragments. The surviving parts of the reliefs depict scenes of tribute bearing to the king from Syria and the west. \n\nThe Black Obelisk was discovered by Sir Austen Henry Layard in 1846 on the citadel of Kalhu. The obelisk was erected by Shalmaneser III and the reliefs depict scenes of tribute bearing as well as the depiction of two subdued rulers, Jehu the Israelite, and Sua the Gilzanean, making gestures of submission to the king. The reliefs on the obelisk have accompanying epigraphs, but besides these the obelisk also possesses a longer inscription that records one of the latest versions of Shalmaneser III's annals, covering the period from his accessional year to his 33rd regnal year.\n\nThe Broken Obelisk, that was also discovered by Rassam at Nineveh. Only the top of this monolith has been reconstructed in the British Museum. The obelisk is the oldest recorded obelisk from Assyria, dating to the 11th century BCE. \n\nThe Romans commissioned obelisks in an ancient Egyptian style. Examples include:\n\nThe prehistoric Tello Obelisk , found in 1919 at Chavín de Huantar in Peru , is a monolith stele with obelisk-like proportions. It is 2.52 metres tall and was carved in a design of low relief with Chavín symbols, such as bands of teeth and animal heads. Long housed in the Museo Nacional de Arqueología, Antropología e Historia del Perú in Lima , it was relocated to the Museo Nacional de Chavín , which opened in July 2008. The obelisk was named for the archaeologist Julio C. Tello , who discovered it and was considered the 'father of Peruvian archaeology'. He was America's first indigenous archaeologist. \n\nEgyptian obelisks remain a source of fascination, serving as a reminder of past glories and a symbol of state power. A majority of modern obelisks are built of masonry or concrete , so not monolithic like their Egyptian counterparts, and are often oversized. Examples from the 19th and 20th centuries include the Obelisk (1800) in Stockholm , Stone of the Empress (1835) in Helsinki , the Wellington Monument (1861) in Dublin , the Washington Monument (1884) in Washington, D.C. , the Obelisk of Buenos Aires (1936) in Buenos Aires , the Monument to the People's Heroes (1958) in Tiananmen Square , Beijing and the National Monument (1975) in Jakarta . A few, however, continue the ancient tradition of the monolithic obelisk.\n\nIn Rome , the Via della Conciliazione , cleared in 1936–1950 to link Saint Peter's Basilica to the centre of the capital is lined with obelisks serving as lampposts .\n\nIn France and other European countries, monuments to the dead, such as headstones and grave markers, were very often given a form of obelisks, but they are of more modest size. The practice is also still widespread in the Islamic world .\n\nModern obelisks have also been used in surveying as boundary markers .\n\nIn late summer 1999, Roger Hopkins and Mark Lehner teamed up with a NOVA crew to erect a 25-ton obelisk. This was the third attempt to erect a 25-ton obelisk; the first two, in 1994 and 1999, ended in failure. There were also two successful attempts to raise a 2-ton obelisk and a 9-ton obelisk. Finally in August–September 1999, after learning from their experiences, they were able to erect one successfully. First Hopkins and Rais Abdel Aleem organized an experiment to tow a block of stone weighing about 25 tons. They prepared a path by embedding wooden rails into the ground and placing a sledge on them bearing a megalith weighing about 25 tons. Initially they used more than 100 people to try to tow it but were unable to budge it. Finally, with well over 130 people pulling at once and an additional dozen using levers to prod the sledge forward, they moved it. Over the course of a day, the workers towed it 10–20 feet. Despite problems with broken ropes, they proved the monument could be moved this way. Additional experiments were done in Egypt and other locations to tow megalithic stone with ancient technologies, some of which are listed here .\n\nOne experiment was to transport a small obelisk on a barge in the Nile River. The barge was built based on ancient Egyptian designs. It had to be very wide to handle the obelisk, with a 2 to 1 ratio length to width, and it was at least twice as long as the obelisk. The obelisk was about 3.0 metres (10 ft) long and no more than 5 metric tons (5.5 short tons). A barge big enough to transport the largest Egyptian obelisks with this ratio would have had to be close to 61-metre-long (200 ft) and 30-metre-wide (100 ft). The workers used ropes that were wrapped around a guide that enabled them to pull away from the river while they were towing it onto the barge. The barge was successfully launched into the Nile.\n\nThe final and successful erection event was organized by Rick Brown, Hopkins, Lehner and Gregg Mullen in a Massachusetts quarry. The preparation work was done with modern technology, but experiments have proven that with enough time and people, it could have been done with ancient technology. To begin, the obelisk was lying on a gravel and stone ramp. A pit in the middle was filled with dry sand. Previous experiments showed that wet sand would not flow as well. The ramp was secured by stone walls. Men raised the obelisk by slowly removing the sand while three crews of men pulled on ropes to control its descent into the pit. The back wall was designed to guide the obelisk into its proper place. The obelisk had to catch a turning groove which would prevent it from sliding. They used brake ropes to prevent it from going too far. Such turning grooves had been found on the ancient pedestals. Gravity did most of the work until the final 15° had to be completed by pulling the obelisk forward. They used brake ropes again to make sure it did not fall forward. On 12 September they completed the project. \n\nThis experiment has been used to explain how the obelisks may have been erected in Luxor and other locations. It seems to have been supported by a 3,000 year-old papyrus scroll in which one scribe taunts another to erect a monument for \"thy lord\". The scroll reads \"Empty the space that has been filled with sand beneath the monument of thy Lord.\" To erect the obelisks at Luxor with this method would have involved using over a million cubic meters of stone, mud brick and sand for both the ramp and the platform used to lower the obelisk. The largest obelisk successfully erected in ancient times weighed 455 metric tons (502 short tons). A 520-metric-ton (570-short-ton) stele was found in Axum , but researchers believe it was broken while attempting to erect it.",
  "Kyokushin ( 極真 ) [ a ] is a style of karate originating in Japan . It is a full-contact style of stand-up fighting and is rooted in a philosophy of self-improvement, discipline, and hard training. \n\nKyokushin Kaikan is the martial arts organization founded in 1964 by Korean-Japanese Masutatsu Oyama ( 大山倍達 , Ōyama Masutatsu ) , officially the International Karate Organization . Previously, this institution was known as the Oyama Dojo . Since 1964, the style has continued to spread to more than 120 countries, becoming one of the largest martial arts organizations in the world, and in Japan itself. [ additional citation(s) needed ]\n\nInitially, Masutatsu Oyama opened his first official dōjō - the Oyama Dojo - in 1953, in a small building behind Rikkyo University to teach Goju-ryu style of traditional Karate . Subsequently, Oyama's Karate theory would deviate from Goju-ryu and would form his own style. His instruction was distinguished by goals improving the strength in the actual battle by performing a kumite that directly hits the opponent's body with a thrust or kick. This was unlike the other schools of Karate at the time. Over the next ten years, Oyama built his organization and demonstrated his karate around the world to spread it.\n\nAround 1956, Oyama would rename his school the \"Oyama Dojo\". In early days of the dojo, Oyama would not take the duty of teaching newer students. Instead, Eiji Yasuda [ ja ] (a Shotokan teacher from Gakushuin University Karatedo Club), Masashi Ishibashi , Ichiro Minamimoto (both Goju-ryu practitioners from Karatedo Club of Nihon University ) and others would teach the newcomers to Oyama's dojo. Later, Kenji Kurosaki also became a teacher in the school. \n\nOn December 6, 1959, Hirofumi Okada [ ja ] was the first person to practice at the Oyama Dojo that was granted a black belt (first dan), and was listed as the first in the official yearly promotion register of the Kyokushin Kaikan. \n\nIn April 1964, Mas Oyama established the 'International Karate Organization Kyokushin kaikan' (commonly abbreviated to IKO or IKOK) under the umbrella of the Kyokushin Scholarship Foundation. Upon formation, Eisaku Sato acted as chairman and Matsuhei Mori as the vice chairman, with Oyama as the director (later president). Oyama directed the organization through a period of expansion. In June of the same year, the headquarters dojo (later the general headquarters) was completed in Ikebukuro , Toshima , Tokyo.\n\nOyama hand-picked instructors who displayed ability in marketing the style and gaining new members. Oyama would choose an instructor to open a new dojo. The instructor would move to that town and demonstrate his karate skills in public places. After that, word of mouth would spread through the local area until the dojo had a dedicated core of students. Kyokushin sought to expand its presence with contact with other martial arts disciples, interaction with other groups, matches, assimilation of martial arts technique.\n\nOyama also sent instructors to other countries such as the Netherlands ( Kenji Kurosaki ), Australia (Mamoru Kaneko and Shigeo Kato), the United States ( Miyuki Miura , Tadashi Nakamura, Shigeru Oyama and Yasuhiko Oyama), Great Britain (Bob Boulton, later joined by Steve Arneil ), Canada (Tatsuji Nakamura) and Brazil ( Seiji Isobe ) to spread Kyokushin in the same way. Many students, including Steve Arneil, Jon Bluming, and Howard Collins, traveled to Japan to train with Oyama directly. Kyokushin also sought to develop a close connection with VIPs and celebrities, focusing on a mass media strategy to increase fans and gain students. \n\nIn 1969, Oyama staged The First All-Japan Full Contact Karate Open Championships and Terutomo Yamazaki became the first champion. All-Japan Championships have been held at every year. In 1975, The First World Full Contact Karate Open Championships were held in Tokyo. \n\nKyokushin Karate would develop notoriety as \"Kenka Karate\" or \"Brawling Karate\", a moniker Oyama disliked. \n\nAt its peak, Oyama was alive in the 1990s, with branches set up in each prefecture, with more than 1,000 official branch dojos in 123 countries around the world, and a scale of 12 million members. [ additional citation(s) needed ]\n\nEven before Mas Oyama's death in 1994, there have been several organizations that broke off from Oyama's IKO. In 1980, the Dutch Kyokushin instructor Jon Bluming would exit the IKO organization to establish the BKK (Budo Kai Kan) in 1980. In 1991, Steve Arneil lead exodus of British Karate Kyokushinkai from IKO, to establish IFK - the International Federation of Karate. \n\nIn April 1994, Oyama died of lung cancer at the age of 70 without naming a successor, leaving Akiyoshi Matsui in charge of the IKO. This has brought much political and economic turmoil to the Kyokushin worldwide, leading to fragmentation of the organization at the national and international level.\n\nAfter Mas Oyama's death, the International Karate Organization (IKO) split into two groups, primarily due to personal conflicts over who should succeed Oyama as chairman. One group led by Shokei Matsui became known as IKO, and a second group led by Yukio Nishida and Sanpei became was known as IKO-2. The will was proven to be invalid in the family Court of Tokyo in 1995.\n\nThere were claims that near the end of his life, Oyama named Matsui (then ranked 5th dan , and clearly junior in rank to several senior instructors) to succeed him in leading the IKO. However this claim has been disputed with Oyama's family and Matsui himself. \n\nAt present there are now several IKO organizations, such as IKO ( Shokei Matsui ), IKO2 Shinkyokushinkai ( Kenji Midori ), IKO3 (Y. Matsushima), IKO4 (T. Tezuka). \n\nKyokushin Karate training consists of three main elements: technique, forms, and sparring. These are sometimes referred to as the three \"K's\" after the Japanese words for them: kihon (basics), kata (formalized sequences of combat techniques), and kumite (sparring).\n\nKata is a form of ritualized self-training in which patterned or memorized movements are done in order to practice a form of combat maneuverings. According to a highly regarded Kyokushin text, \"The Budo Karate of Mas Oyama\" by Cameron Quinn, long time interpreter to Oyama, the kata of Kyokushin are classified into Northern and Southern Kata.\n\nThe northern kata stems from the Shuri-te tradition of karate, and are drawn from Shotokan karate which Oyama learned while training under Gichin Funakoshi . The southern kata stems from the Naha-te tradition of karate, and are mostly drawn from Goju-ryu karate, which Oyama learned while training under So Nei Chu and Gogen Yamaguchi . One exception may be the kata \"Yantsu\" which possibly originates with Motobu-ha Shito-ryu . There is also Ura Kata - Several kata are also done in \" ura \", which essentially means all moves are done in mirrored form. The ura , or 'reverse' kata, were developed by Oyama as an aid to developing balance and skill in circular techniques against multiple opponents.\n\nSparring , also called kumite , is used to train the application of the various techniques within a fighting situation . Sparring is usually an important part of training in most Kyokushin organizations, especially at the upper levels with experienced students.\n\nIn most Kyokushin organizations, hand and elbow strikes to the head or neck are prohibited. However, kicks to the head, knee strikes, punches to the upper body, and kicks to the inner and outer leg are permitted. In some Kyokushin organizations, especially outside of a tournament environment, gloves and shin protectors are worn. Children often wear headgear to lessen the impact of any kicks to the head. Speed and control are instrumental in sparring and in a training environment it is not the intention of either practitioner to injure his opponent as much as it is to successfully execute the proper strike. Tournament fighting under knockdown karate rules is significantly different as the objective is to down an opponent. Full-contact sparring in Kyokushin is considered the ultimate test of strength, endurance, techniques and spirit. [ better source needed ]\n\nAlso known as Goshin Jitsu , the specific self-defense techniques of the style draw much of their techniques and tactics from Mas Oyama's study of Daitō-ryū Aiki-jūjutsu under Yoshida Kotaro . These techniques were never built into the formal grading system, and as karate itself grew increasingly sport-oriented, the self-defense training started to fall into obscurity. Today it is only practiced in a limited number of dojos. However, the proper Kyokushin Karate techniques are extremely effective when it comes to self-defense in any type of fight due to its full body contact fighting style [ citation needed ] .\n\nColored belts have their origin in Judo , as does the training gi , or more correctly in Japanese, dōgi or keikogi . The example below uses the rank structure used by Kyokushin Karate's West Los Angeles Branch although the order of belt colors does vary between Kyokushin groups. For example, 10th & 9th kyus in most groups wear orange belts, while in other groups in rare cases they wear red belts instead.\n\nNumerous tournaments are arranged by several Kyokushin organizations. Some of the most prestigious tournaments are:\n\nThe style has international appeal with practitioners have over the last 40 years numbered more than 12 million. [ additional citation(s) needed ]\n\nBobby Lowe opened the first Kyokushin dojo outside of Japan in Hawaii in 1957. After Lowe, Oyama ordered Miyuki Miura , Tadashi Nakamura, Shigeru Oyama and Yasuhiko Oyama to establish Kyokushin Dojos in mainland United States .\n\nKyokushin Karate was introduced to United Kingdom by Steve Arneil . Originally from Republic of South Africa , Arneil initially intended to establish his Kyokushin Dojo there, but was requested by Mas Oyama to go to the United Kingdom to help establish Kyokushin karate there. Subsequently, he and his wife traveled to London in 1965. \n\nBritish Kyokushinkai Karate was founded in 1965 after the return of Steve Arneil and Bob Boulton from Japan, where they studied Kyokushinkai in the Tokyo Hombu. Thanks to the deep knowledge and efforts of Shihan Steve Arneil (now 10th dan), the British organization has achieved great success.\n\nKyokushin was introduced to Canada by Tats Nakamura in 1992 at Vancouver, British Columbia. There have been practitioners in Vancouver, BC, Canada since the late 70s/early 80s where it was referred to as Kyokushinkai and operated independently. Some known black belts are Tom Blaney, Andy Puuseppä, Shawn Ho, and Georges Saint-Pierre.\n\nShihan Stuart Corrigal (7th degree black belt) is the current representative in Canada for Kyokushin Karate.\n\nKyokushin was introduced by Mamoru Kaneko and Shigeo Kato.\n\nKyokushin was introduced to Netherlands by Jon Bluming and Kenji Kurosaki . On January 2, 1962, Jon Bluming, on behalf of Masutatsu Oyama, creates the first European karate association, called the NKA (Netherlands Karate Association). Under his leadership, the new school quickly gained strength and popularity. In the late 1970s, Jon Bluming leaves the leadership of the organization to his students, and he himself creates a new organization, Kyokushin Budokai Karate.\n\nKyokushin is integral part of Dutch martial arts scene, as it laid foundation for \"Dutch-style Kickboxing\", advocated by entities like Mejiro Gym and Chakuriki Gym .\n\nThere are various associations at national level in Germany today, including the KKD (Kyokushinkai Karate Germany) and the DKO (German Kyokushin Organization) and the IKOK-D (International Karate Organization Kyokushinkaikan Germany). These are not automatically in the IKO1 on an international level, so the IKOK-D is in the IKO1 (Kyokushinkaikan Honbu) and the DKO in the WKO/IKO2 (Midori).\n\nDaman Basnet is the founder chairman of Nepal.\nAcademy of Kyoukushin Karate (NAKK) He was\nappointed as a representative of Nepal from International\nKarate organization Kyoukushin Kai-kan Japan.\nFor the past many decades, he has been devoted in\nKyokushin Karate and had also organized many tournaments in Nepal.\nHe has participated in many international competitions, some of his accomplishments are:\nHe was selected as a Referee in 7th Asian Open\nKarate Tournament, held in India in 1995 and 30th All Japan\nOpen Karate Tournament held in Japan in 1997. He was also\nhonored as Observer in Australian Tournament 1997, World\nCup 96, Japan and had also taken his students to compete and many more.\nHe is now devoted in producing students of International Standard.\n\nKyokushin was introduced to Brazil by Seiji Isobe . Isobe had been operating a Kyokushin Dojo in Fukui, established on September 20, 1972 - when Mas Oyama offered Isobe the mission of promoting and setting up a dojo network in South America . That same year, Seiji Isobe permanently moved to Brazil and became the head of Kyokushin in South America.\n\nIKO1 (headed by Shokei Matsui, in which Isobe represents Brazil at international level) and Seiwakai Karate (headed by Ademir da Costa ) are the most prominent styles of Knockdown Karate in Brazil.\n\nAndrzej Drewniak is credited for bringing Kyokushin to Poland. Fascinated by karate, he founded the first Polish Karate Kyokushin section at AZS in Krakow in 1972. In 1974 he became the Polish middleweight champion in kyokushin karate. In the same year he went to a training camp in the Netherlands, where he passed the 1st dan exam, becoming the first Polish holder of a black belt and the title of Kyokushin karate sensei. In 1979, he became a co-founder of the Polish Karate Association, of which he has been a long-term vice-president. \n\nThanks to the support of Loek Hollander , the president of the European Karate Kyokushinkai Organization, he received an annual scholarship and an invitation to Japan, but only after six years, secretly from the political and sports authorities, he managed to go to Tokyo. At the end of his stay in Japan, he obtained the 4th dan, after 15 months of training under Sosai Masutatsu Ōyama, where he was the only Polish uchideshi . \n\nMost Kyokushin karate clubs, regardless of their affiliation to world organizations, are also concentrated in the Kyokushin Commission of the Polish Karate Association (KK PZK / Komisji Kyokushin Polskiego Związku Karate) under which inter-organizational competitions of the rank of the Polish Championships and the Macro-region Championships are held.\n\nThe \"World Oyama Karate\"-style, founded by Shigeru Ōyama (10th dan) - has its largest concentration of practitioners in Poland, with largest number of clubs in the world. After Shigeru Ōyama retired from the leadership of the organization, hanshi Jan Dyduch (8th dan) from Krakow became the director of the organization (OYAMA International Karate Federation), who is also the leader of the Polish organization. \n\nIn Hungary, István Adámy and Kálmán Furkó are credited for establishing Kyokushin in the country. In 1977, István Adámy received the 1st Dan Black in Kyokushin and was appointed branch leader of Hungary by IKO. Kálmán Furkó obtained his first dan degree in 1978 and became a shihan in Szolnok in 1984.\n\nThe development of domestic Kyokushin started in 1976. By the mid-1980s, there were nearly ten thousand practitioners of Kyokushin Karate in Hungary.\nSince then, Kyokushin has been one of the most popular karate styles in Hungary. István Adámy and Kálmán Furkó worked together until the political problems in IKO, following death of Mas Oyama. Since then, they have been on separate paths, but working towards the same goal.\n\nHungary is particular for hosting the Ibutz Oyama Cup , which was held three times between 1983 and 1986 at the National Sports Arena in Budapest. The tournament was held in three different weight classes. Kyokushin founder Masutatsu Ōyama first visited Hungary in 1983 and was also involved in overseeing the next two tournaments. \n\nThe founder of Kyokushinkai karate in the USSR is Alexander Ivanovich Tanyushkin [ ru ] . While in Poland on a business trip, Tanyushkin met Andrzej Drewniak in Krakow and began to practice karate with him. After some time, having learned about the existence of Kyokushinkai style karate, Tanyushkin and Drewnyak wrote a letter to Masutatsu Oyama and, on his instructions, began to cooperate with the President of the European Kyokushinkai Organization, Loek Hollander . Tanyushkin opened the first section of Kyokushinkai in the USSR in Moscow in 1973. By the end of the 1970s, a school had formed in the country with representatives in all major regions. \n\nAfter the almost 10-year ban on karate was lifted in 1989, Tanyushkin established the Kyokushinkai Federation of the USSR. The creation of such a federation was a huge step forward for the development of martial arts in the USSR.\n\nDuring the period of work of the national organization, Kyokushinkai karate entered the country's sports classification system as an official sport (1990), and development reached the international level. In 1993, the Kyokushinkai Federation of Russia was one of the first to join the new International Karate Federation (IFK), headed by Hansi Steve Arneil (now 10th dan). On behalf of IFK, on the basis of the Russian national organization, the Eurasian Committee (EAC) was created, representing IFK in the territory of the former USSR. It was headed by S. Stepanov (now 5 dan Kyokushin-kan). The Committee existed until 1998, having held 6 international class \"A\" tournaments during this time.\n\nAfter the death of Masutatsu Oyama in 1994 and the split of the Kyokushinkai, from the late 90s, other Kyokushin Federations began to develop in Russia, representing various international organizations. Now in Russia they are working:\n\nThese five Federations are united in the Kyokushin Association of Russia, accredited by the Ministry of Sports and headed by Yu. P. Trutnev (currently Vice Prime Minister of the Government of Russia, Plenipotentiary Representative of the President of the Russian Federation in the Far East). \n\nSome of these organizations (in particular, the Kyokushin Federation of Russia, the Russian Kyokushinkaikan Karate Union, etc.) are members of the All-Style Karate Federation of Russia. In addition, some of these organizations (in particular, the Russian Kyokushin Association, the Russian Kyokushin Karate Federation, the Russian Kyokushin Karate-do Federation, the Russian Kyokushin Federation, the Russian Kyokushin Federation, etc.) are members of the Russian Union of Martial Arts. \n\nLarge majority of Kyokushin Clubs in Lithuania belong to Kenji Midori's WKO Shin-Kyokushin (formerly IKO-2) organization. [ need quotation to verify ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] Currently, there are two IKO-1 clubs Samurajus in Marijampolė and IchiGeki Sports Club in Vilnius .\n\nBulgaria is well known in the KYOKUSHIN KARATE world since two Bulgarian karatekas had proven their quality in a numerous international, European and world championships.\n\nZahari Damyanov: 4 times European and absolute world champion. Ivanka Popova: Absolute European champion.\n\nThere are a large number of Kyokushin practitioners in Spain, especially on the Mediterranean coast. The main organisations operating in this country are the IKO1 of Matsui, the Shinkyokushinkai, and the WKB. Of these, the WKB is the one with the greatest presence and expansion in the Spanish territory. The most outstanding fighter in Spain is Alejandro Navarro .\n\nKyokushin was introduced to Singapore and of most of South East Asia by Shihan Peter Chong . [ additional citation(s) needed ] Chong had established the first Kyokushin Dojo in Singapore in 1968, which was not registered with the Singapore Karate Association at the time. \n\nIranian Kyokushin fighters have been successful in top-level competition. In particular, Iran is highly successful in Kyokushin World Tournament Open hosted by IKO3 / Matsushima Group . \n\nIndia\n\nKyokushin Karate was introduced by Sensei Abhijit Seal, Indian fighters have not been quite successful in international tournaments. It probably holds a good future. Kyokushin Union India is the official organization. \n\nTo Slovakia, Kyokushin was introduced by Norbert Rácz (now 5. dan) in 1994. Norbert Rácz is the Chairman of the Slovak Kyokushin Karate Association from 1998.\n\nAfter Oyama's death, several different Kyokushin organizations began to emerge in Japan and beyond.\n\nInternationally, the name of the original organization is/has been carried by multiple organizations:\n\nOther Japanese Kyokushin organizations that do not use the official name \"IKO\" and \"Kyokushinkaikan\".\n\nKyokushin has had an influence on many other styles:\n\nKokondo is derived from Kyokushin, albeit without a strong focus on competition with the emphasis rather on realistic goshin-jutsu (self-defense). [ citation needed ] Some styles originating in Kyokushin (Jushindo, Kūdō , Zendokai ) have changed to mixed martial arts rules. [ citation needed ]\n\nKyokushin has influenced other styles, especially the knockdown karate competition format. [ citation needed ] Karate styles that originated in Kyokushin, such as Ashihara Karate, Budokaido, Godokai, Enshin Karate , Seidō juku, Musokai, Shidōkan , World Oyama and Seidokaikan , are also knockdown styles and use slight variations of the competition rules. [ citation needed ]\n\nMany top kickboxers such as Andy Hug , Francisco Filho and Masahiro Yamamoto - have started in knockdown karate. The influence of Kyokushin can be seen in the K-1 kickboxing tournament that originated out of the Seidokaikan karate organization, which is an offshoot from Kyokushin. \n\nKyokushin is the basis of glove karate, a knockdown karate format wearing boxing gloves and allowing punches to the head. Glove karate rules are used in Kyokushin Karate Iran. \n\nKyokushin Karate has featured in following videogames:\n\nA trilogy of films starring Sonny Chiba and directed by Kazuhiko Yamaguchi were produced in Japan between 1975 and 1977: Champion of Death , Karate Bearfighter and Karate for Life . Chiba plays Master Oyama, who also appears in two of the films. \n\nThe James Bond movie You Only Live Twice , starring Sean Connery , was filmed largely in Japan and featured a karate demonstration by a number of well-known Kyokushin students, including Shigeo Kato (who introduced Kyokushin to Australia and was the original teacher of Shokei Matsui ) and Akio Fujihira. [ additional citation(s) needed ]",
  "In the early 20th century, German researchers found additional evidence linking smoking to health harms , which strengthened the anti-tobacco movement in the Weimar Republic and led to a state-supported anti-smoking campaign. Early anti-tobacco movements grew in many nations from the middle of the 19th century. The 1933–1945 anti-tobacco campaigns in Nazi Germany have been widely publicized, although stronger laws than those passed in Germany were passed in some American states, the UK, and elsewhere between 1890 and 1930. After 1941, anti-tobacco campaigns were restricted by the Nazi government . \n\nThe German movement was the most powerful anti-smoking movement in the world during the 1930s and early 1940s. However, tobacco control policy was incoherent and ineffective, with uncoordinated and often regional efforts by many actors. Obvious measures were not taken, and existing measures were not enforced. Some Nazi leaders condemned smoking and several of them openly criticized tobacco consumption, but others publicly smoked and denied that it was harmful. \n\nThere was much research on smoking and its effects on health during Nazi rule, and it was the most important of its type at that time. A directly supported tobacco research institute produced work of only marginal scientific importance, but substantial academic work was done privately, with little to negative official support. \n\nAdolf Hitler 's personal distaste for tobacco and the Nazi reproductive policies were among the motivating factors behind the Nazi campaigns against smoking. The Nazi anti-tobacco campaign included banning smoking in trams, buses, and city trains, promoting health education, limiting cigarette rations in the Wehrmacht , organizing medical lectures for soldiers, and raising the tobacco tax. The Nazis also imposed restrictions on tobacco advertising and smoking in public spaces, and regulated restaurants and coffeehouses. However, these measures were widely circumvented or ignored. \n\nThe movement did not reduce the number of smokers . Tobacco use increased rapidly in the early years of the Nazi regime , between 1933 and 1939. The number of smokers increased from 1939 to 1945, but cigarette consumption declined; rationing towards the end of the war and post-war poverty meant that the increasing numbers of smokers could not buy as many cigarettes. Nazi-related nicotine marketing messages have often been used to oppose tobacco control, and criticized for historical inaccuracy. Even by the end of the 20th century, the anti-smoking movement in Germany had not attained the influence of the Nazi anti-smoking campaign. Germany has some of the weakest tobacco control measures in Europe, and German tobacco research has been described as \"muted\". \n\nAnti-smoking measures have a long history in German-speaking areas. For instance, in 1840, the Prussian government reinstated a ban on smoking in public places. The 1880s invention of automated cigarette-making machinery in the American South made it possible to mass-produce cigarettes at low cost, and smoking became common in Western countries. This led to a backlash and a tobacco prohibition movement , which challenged tobacco use as harmful and brought about some bans on tobacco sale and use. \n\nThe German Empire also had anti-tobacco sentiment in the early 20th century. Critics of smoking organized the first anti-tobacco group in the country, named the Deutscher Tabakgegnerverein zum Schutze der Nichtraucher (German Tobacco Opponents' Association for the Protection of Non-smokers). Established in 1904, this organization existed for only a brief period. The next anti-tobacco organization, the Bund Deutscher Tabakgegner (Federation of German Tobacco Opponents), was established in 1910 in Trautenau , Bohemia . Other anti-smoking organizations were established in 1912 in the cities of Hanover and Dresden . \n\nAfter World War I , anti-tobacco movements continued in the German Weimar Republic , against a background of increasing medical research. German researchers were heavily involved with early research into tobacco harms . In the 1920s and 1930s, the Weimar Republic was at the cutting edge of tobacco research. \n\nIn 1920, a Bund Deutscher Tabakgegner in der Tschechoslowakei (Federation of German Tobacco Opponents in Czechoslovakia) was formed in Prague , after Czechoslovakia was separated from Austria at the end of World War I . A Bund Deutscher Tabakgegner in Deutschösterreich (Federation of German Tobacco Opponents in German Austria ) was established in Graz in 1920. These groups published journals advocating nonsmoking. The first such German language journal was Der Tabakgegner (The Tobacco Opponent), published by the Bohemian organization between 1912 and 1932. Deutscher Tabakgegner (German Tobacco Opponent) was published in Dresden from 1919 to 1935, and was the second journal on this subject. Anti-tobacco organizations were often also against consumption of alcoholic beverages . \n\nResearch on tobacco's effects on population health were more advanced in Germany than in any other nation by the time the Nazis came to power. While a link between smoking and cancers had been observed as early as the 1700s, the first good statistical evidence that linked smoking to lung cancer and other illnesses was published in Germany and eastern Europe before the Nazi takeover (though some sources claim that the link between lung cancer and tobacco was first proven in Nazi Germany). Physicians were also aware that smoking was responsible for cardiac diseases , which were considered to be the most serious disease resulting from smoking. Use of nicotine was sometimes considered to be responsible for increased reports of myocardial infarction in the country. In the later years of World War II, researchers considered nicotine a factor behind the coronary heart failures suffered by a significant number of military personnel in the Eastern Front . A pathologist of the Heer examined thirty-two young soldiers who had died from myocardial infarction at the front, and documented in a 1944 report that all of them were \"enthusiastic smokers\". He cited the opinion of pathologist Franz Buchner that cigarettes are \"a coronary poison of the first order\". \n\nThe term \" passive smoking \" (\" Passivrauchen \") was coined in Nazi Germany, by Fritz Lickint , a researcher purged from his public position by the Nazis in 1934 for political reasons. While in private practice, Lickint continued his research. In 1935 he published Der Bronchialkrebs der Raucher (\"Bronchial cancer in smokers\"), a follow-up to his 1930 review, Tabak und Tabakrauch als ätiologische Faktoren des Carcinoms (\"Tobacco and tobacco smoke as aetiological factors in carcinoma \"). The 1935 review attributed the rapidly-rising rates of cancers of the airway to smoking. In 1939 Lickint published Tabak und Organismus (\"Tobacco and the body\"), a book that ran to over 1,200 pages, giving a definitive review of existing research into the physiological effects of tobacco. It described smoking as a cause of cancers, cardiovascular diseases, changes in blood composition, lowered fertility, and mutations. It described nicotine use as an addiction, likening it to alcoholism and suggesting similar treatments. It also suggested anti-smoking public health measures, including measures against passive smoking. Lickint was in military service from 1939 to 1945; he survived and continued his research after the war. \n\nFurther observational studies were done in Nazi Germany and the wartime Netherlands. Nazi Germany supported epidemiological research on the harmful effects of tobacco use. Hitler personally gave financial support to the Wissenschaftliches Institut zur Erforschung der Tabakgefahren (Scientific Institute for the Research into the Hazards of Tobacco) at the University of Jena , in Thuringia , headed by Karl Astel . Established in 1941, it was the most significant anti-tobacco institute in Nazi Germany. However, it never had its own buildings or staff, nor regular funding, and overall its research into the dangers of tobacco was limited, and only of marginal scientific significance and repute. Further research into the effects of tobacco on health was carried out with Nazi funding. In 1939, Franz H. Müller (a member of the National Socialist Motor Corps or NSKK, and the Nazi Party ) published a study reporting a higher prevalence of lung cancer among smokers. The study had serious weaknesses in its methodology, but study design problems were better addressed in subsequent studies. Dietrich Eberhard Schairer also used case-control epidemiological methods to study lung cancer among smokers, in 1943. [ citation needed ] Due to the research institute and local political support, including from Fritz Sauckel (the Gauleiter of Thuringia) and Leonardo Conti (the Reich Health Leader ), Thuringia became a test bed for anti-smoking measures, most of which were never implemented elsewhere. \n\nAfter 1941, Nazi tobacco research was deliberately slowed, along with other restrictions on anti-tobacco publications. At the end of the war, the fates of those involved in supporting and carrying out research varied. Karl Astel, who was heavily involved in mass murder and research practices which would probably have seen him tried as a war criminal, killed himself. Fritz Sauckel was executed for crimes against humanity . Leonardo Conti killed himself while awaiting trial for his involvement in mass murder of ill people . Hans Reiter (the Reich Health Office president) was interned for two years and spent the rest of his career in private practice. Others worked in the field after the war; pharmacologist Gustav Kuschinsky continued work similar to that begun with funding from Astel's institute with funding from the cigarette company Reemtsma . Fritz Lickint was appointed to public hospital and teaching posts again after the war. \n\nMany wartime research publications were never shipped abroad, and after the war, pre-war and wartime publications on nicotine were ignored even within Germany. Post-war researchers were unaware of the earlier non-English-language studies. They therefore duplicated the case-control studies showing the association with illness before doing prospective cohort studies that established causality in the 1950s. There is a popular belief that American and British scientists first discovered the health harms of tobacco in the 1950s. [ clarification needed ]\n\nHitler viewed smoking as \"the wrath of the Red Man against the White Man , vengeance for having been given hard liquor \", lamenting that \"so many excellent men have been lost to tobacco poisoning\". He was unhappy because both Eva Braun and Martin Bormann were smokers and was concerned over Hermann Göring 's continued smoking in public places. He was angered when a statue portraying a cigar-smoking Göring was commissioned. Hitler is often considered to be the first national leader to advocate nonsmoking; however, James VI and I , king of Scotland and England, was openly against smoking 330 years prior, and the near-contemporary 1600s Chinese emperors Chongzhen and Kangxi both decreed the death penalty for smokers. \n\nHitler disapproved of the military personnel's freedom to smoke, and during World War II he said on 2 March 1942, \"it was a mistake, traceable to the army leadership at the time, at the beginning of the war\". He also said that it was \"not correct to say that a soldier cannot live without smoking\". He promised to end the use of tobacco in the military after the end of the war. Hitler personally encouraged close friends not to smoke. He even began to offer a gold watch to any of his inner circle who could quit . However, Hitler's personal distaste for tobacco was only one of several catalysts behind the anti-smoking campaign. \n\nIn the 1920s, many German cigarette firms went bankrupt; further, the market was increasingly dominated by a few large, highly automated manufacturers. By 1933, with high unemployment, the Nazi party was attacking the tobacco industry for having foreign and Jewish connections, and for competing with the Nazi party's own cigarette company . \n\nThe Nazi reproductive policies were a significant factor behind their anti-tobacco campaign. The Nazi leadership wanted German women to have as many children as possible. Articles and a major medical book published in the 1930s observed an association between smoking (in both men and women) and lower fertility, including more miscarriages. The idea that male fertility was also affected by smoking was not a new one at that time. An article published in a German gynecology journal in 1943 stated that women smoking three or more cigarettes per day were more likely to remain childless compared to nonsmoking women. Martin Staemmler [ de ] , a prominent physician during the Nazi era, said that smoking by pregnant women resulted in a higher rate of stillbirths and miscarriages (a claim supported by modern research, for nicotine -using mothers, fathers, and their offspring ). This view was also promoted in a 1936 book by well-known female racial hygienist Agnes Bluhm . \n\nWomen who smoked were viewed as unsuitable to be wives and mothers in a German family. Werner Huttig of the Nazi Party 's Rassenpolitisches Amt (Office of Racial Politics) said that a smoking mother 's breast milk contained nicotine , a claim that modern research has proven correct. Smoking women were also considered to be vulnerable to premature aging and loss of physical attractiveness (smoking's effects on the skin were studied at the time; smoking does make the skin age faster and was known by 1940 to be linked to earlier death ).\n\nThere was also concern that mutations caused by cigarette smoking would have irreversible long-term effects on the genetics of the population. Tobacco was described as a \"genetic poison\" (see epigenetic effects of smoking for modern research). In Nazi rhetoric, these concerns were connected to racist theories about the \"German germ plasm \". \n\nMeasures protecting non-smokers (especially children and mothers) from passive smoking were tied to the Nazi's desire for healthy young soldiers and workers. They were tied to the concepts of Volksgesundheit (People's Health) and Gesundheitspflicht (Duty to be Healthy). Physical fitness was promoted, and tobacco use was discouraged as incompatible with physical fitness. Antismoking campaigns were accompanied by other health campaigns, such as discouraging the consumption of alcohol (especially during pregnancy) and encouraging the eating of fruit, vegetables, and whole-wheat bread. \n\nThere was never a coherent Nazi policy to impede smoking. Mostly, measures were based on pre-existing policies. Although in some places some stern measures were taken, tobacco control policy was incoherent and ineffective, and obvious measures were not taken. Tobacco controls were often not enforced. Smoking bans were widely ignored. Measures reached their peak in 1939–1941, after which some were rolled back or actively prevented. \n\nThere was great regional variation in tobacco policies, making it possible to find wildly contradictory individual examples. Almost no anti-smoking efforts were made in Nazi Austria , for instance. In Jena , Thuringia , very strong anti-smoking measures were enacted, due to the power of Karl Astel there and his support from Fritz Sauckel (the Gauleiter of Thuringia) and Leonardo Conti (the Reich Health Leader). These measures included the first 20th-century university campus smoking ban. There were many small, local anti-tobacco measures, which were often unapproved and viewed negatively by the Nazi Party. \n\nThe Nazi anti-tobacco policies were not free of contradictions. For example, the Volksgesundheit (People's Health) and Gesundheitspflicht (Duty to be Healthy) policies were enforced in parallel with the active distribution of cigarettes to people whom the Nazis saw as \"deserving\" groups (e.g. frontline soldiers, members of the Hitler Youth). On the other hand, \"undeserving\" and stigmatized groups (Jews, war prisoners) were denied access to tobacco. \n\nThe Nazis used several public relations tactics to convince the general population of Germany not to smoke, and gave variable support to non-officially-approved propaganda. National and local government organizations, party-controlled organizations, voluntary organizations, and medical organizations were all involved. The messages differed; propaganda by Nazi Party organizations generally described tobacco as harmful to women or young people, while publications by medical professionals tended to describe the health hazards of smoking. In 1941, the propaganda ministry issued orders to \"completely cease any anti-tobacco propaganda in the public\", with minor exceptions, which had to be submitted for censorship. \n\nThe Public Health Office repeatedly made precise public statements about the health harms of smoking (under both Gerhard Wagner and his successor, Leonardo Conti). The Reich Health Office also issued warnings, and the Reich Bureau Against the Dangers of Alcohol and Tobacco was founded. In 1939, a Bureau against the Dangers of Alcohol and Tobacco was formed. The anti-smoking campaign undertaken by the Nazis also included health education. [ clarification needed ] \n\nThe Deutsche Arbeitsfront (the government monopoly union) also ran anti-smoking campaigns. An anti-smoking speech by its head met with official disapproval. Anti-smoking messages were sent to the people in their workplaces, often with the help of the Hitler-Jugend (HJ) and the Bund Deutscher Mädel (BDM). \n\nWell-known health magazines like the Gesundes Volk (Healthy People), Volksgesundheit (People's Health) and Gesundes Leben (Healthy Life) also published warnings about the health consequences of smoking and posters showing the harmful effects of tobacco were displayed. Some anti-smoking posters were unapproved and censured by the government. Editorials discussing the issue of smoking and its effects were published in newspapers. Articles advocating nonsmoking were also published in the magazines Die Genussgifte (The Recreational Stimulants), Auf der Wacht (On the Guard) and Reine Luft (Clean Air). Out of these magazines, Reine Luft was the main journal of the anti-tobacco movement. Karl Astel's Institute for Tobacco Hazards Research at Jena University purchased and distributed hundreds of reprints from Reine Luft . The magazine was published by tobacco control activists; it was later, in 1941, ordered by the propaganda ministry to moderate its tone and submit all material for pre-approval. \n\nRestrictions were imposed on the advertisement of tobacco products, enacted on 7 December 1941 and signed by Heinrich Hunke, the President of the Advertising Council. Advertisements trying to depict smoking as harmless or as an expression of masculinity were banned. Ridiculing anti-tobacco activists was also outlawed, as was the use of advertising posters along rail tracks, in rural regions, stadiums and racing tracks. Advertising by loudspeakers and mail was also prohibited. A ban on tobacco advertising was decided against by Max Amann (Hitler's secretary, Reich Leader for the Press, and Leader of the Party Publishing Company, Eher Verlag ). However, advertising restrictions remained in place, even after 1941, and there was a plan to tighten them, although proposals to restrict tobacco ads to statements of manufacturer, brand, and price were explicitly rejected by the party. \n\nNichtraucherschutz (the protection of non-smokers [from passive smoking ]) was the principle behind some bans. In 1941, tobacco smoking in trams was outlawed in sixty German cities. In 1944, smoking in buses and city trains was made illegal, on the personal initiative of Hitler, who feared female ticket collectors might be the victims of passive smoking. \n\nSmoking was also banned not only in health care institutions, but also in several public offices and in rest homes. Midwives were restricted from smoking while on duty. Smoking was also outlawed in bomb shelters ; however, some shelters had separate rooms for smoking. In 1939, the Nazi Party outlawed smoking in all of its offices premises, and Heinrich Himmler , the then chief of the Schutzstaffel (SS), restricted police personnel from smoking while they were on duty. In 1938, the Reichspost imposed a ban on smoking. However, despite public encouragement against smoking, bans on smoking were seldom enforced and were ineffective. Among Nazi leadership, Hermann Goering smoked cigars, and Himmler and Joseph Goebbels smoked cigarettes, as did Magda Goebbels and Eva Braun , Hitler's romantic partner. \n\nSpecial care was taken to discourage pregnant women and youth from smoking. The president of the Medical Association in Germany [ clarification needed ] announced, \"German women don't smoke\". Pregnant women, and women below the age of 25 and over the age of 55, were not given tobacco ration cards during World War II. Restrictions on selling tobacco products to women were imposed on the hospitality and food retailing industry, though restrictions on women smoking in restaurants were officially rejected by the Nazi party. Anti-tobacco films aimed at women were publicly shown. Some local measures were quite strict; for instance, one district department of the National Socialist Factory Cell Organization (NSBO) announced that it would expel female members who smoked publicly. Some women working in arms factories, however, were given special cigarette rations. \n\nSmoking was also banned inside many schools. In July 1943, public smoking for persons under the age of 18 was outlawed, although under-18s were still allowed to purchase and privately smoke tobacco. The US and UK had less lenient regulations. \n\nRestrictions on smoking were also introduced in the Wehrmacht . Soldiers were not issued with more than six free cigarettes per day. Extra cigarettes were often sold to the soldiers, especially when there was no military advance or retreat in the battleground; however, these were restricted to 50 for each person per month. Non-smokers could receive alternative rations, such as food and chocolate. Teenaged soldiers serving in the 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend , composed of Hitler Youth members, were given confectionery instead of tobacco products, although other Hitler Youth members were given cigarettes. The Wehrmacht's female auxiliary personnel were not given cigarette rations. Medical lectures were arranged to persuade military personnel to quit smoking. \n\nIn 1938, the Luftwaffe imposed a ban on smoking. [ clarification needed ] In 1939, Heinrich Himmler , the then chief of the Schutzstaffel (SS), restricted police personnel and SS officers from smoking while they were on duty. The JAMA also reported that Hermann Göring had banned soldiers from smoking when on the streets, on marches, or only briefly off-duty. \n\nTobacco companies represented themselves as strong and early supporters of the Nazi cause. They made unparalleled financial contributions to Nazi causes; the Sturmabteilung and other party organizations were repeatedly given six-figure sums, and the Hitler Youth were given an aircraft. One cigarette company paid over 12.3 million reichsmarks in bribes to Hermann Göring . The Nazi SA founded its own cigarette company , and violently promoted its own brands, breaking into stores that did not stock them and assaulting shopkeepers. \n\nSome senior Nazi officials were opposed to anti-tobacco measures. Hermann Goering publicly smoked cigars, despite Hitler's opposition. Joseph Goebbels felt that cigarettes were essential to the war effort, and (as propaganda minister) restricted anti-tobacco propaganda, arguing that anti-smoking campaigns were incompatible with free cigarettes being issued to millions serving in the military, legal tobacco advertising, and authority figures who smoked and denied the dangers of smoking. Despite government regulations, many women in Germany regularly smoked, including the wives of many high-ranking Nazi officials. For instance, Magda Goebbels smoked even while she was being interviewed by a journalist. Eva Braun also smoked. \n\nThe tobacco industry worked to counter the government campaign to prevent women from smoking and used smoking models in their advertisements. Fashion illustrations displaying women with cigarettes were often published in prominent publications such as the Beyers Mode für Alle (Beyers Fashion For All). The cover of the popular song Lili Marleen featured singer Lale Andersen holding a cigarette. \n\nThe cigarette manufacturing companies in Germany made several attempts to weaken the scientific credibility of the anti-tobacco campaign. They tried to depict the anti-tobacco movement as \"fanatic\" and \"unscientific\". They published new journals (with titles such as Chronica Nicotiana and Der Tabak: Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Internationalen Tabakwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft , or \"Tobacco: the scientific journal of the International Tobacco Scientific Society\"). One industry-funded tobacco counter-research institute, the Tabacologia medicinalis , was shut down by Reich Health Leader Leonardo Conti . Another such \"academy\" was called Academia Nicotiana Internationalis . \n\nWhile some cigarette ads had been banned from Nazi party publications due to Jewish ownership, the publications lost money, and the early party needed money for election campaigning. In June 1932, Hitler personally made a deal for half a million marks worth of cigarette advertising. \n\nThe Nazi paramilitary SA was funded by cigarette royalties . After the Night of the Long Knives , the Reemtsma cigarette company paid a fixed fee (a quarter-million marks for the first year) to produce the SA's permitted cigarettes. A plan to establish a state tobacco monopoly was not carried out. \n\nEfforts were made to keep cigarettes freely available. In the inter-war period, cigarettes were made with tobacco from Greece, Bulgaria, and Turkey. Pipe tobacco and cigar tobacco often came from overseas, so the war disrupted their availability. The tobacco industry worked closely with occupying forces in the Crimea , where forced labour, including child labour, was used to harvest tobacco. Forced labour was used in cigarette manufacture, with prison camps set up at some locations. More cigarettes were made with less tobacco, to stretch the supply. Demand was also controlled; \"undeserving\" groups were forbidden to enter tobacconists, and later from buying tobacco. \n\nAn ordinance enacted on 3 November 1941 raised tobacco taxes by approximately 80–95% of the retail price. It would be the highest rise in tobacco taxes in Germany until more than 25 years after the collapse of the Nazi regime . By 1941, tobacco taxes made up about a twelfth of state income, and antismoking efforts were being discouraged. \n\nDespite these efforts, in 1942 there was a shortage of tobacco, and two-thirds of all German tobacco factories were shut down, some to be converted into armaments factories. Tobacco went on the ration : smokers were not allowed to buy more than a limited amount. Cigarette consumption stopped rising rapidly and fell rapidly, although the number of smokers continued to rise. \n\nThe early anti-smoking campaign was considered a failure, and from 1933 to 1937 there was a rapid increase in tobacco consumption in Germany. The rate of smoking in the nation increased faster even than in neighboring France , where the anti-tobacco movement was tiny and far less influential. Between 1932 and 1939, per capita cigarette consumption in Germany increased from 570 to 900 per year, while the corresponding numbers for France were from 570 to 630. After 1938, the war prevented the publication of sales figures. Tobacco consumption rose until 1942, when tobacco went on the ration , due to supply shortages. The number of smokers continued to rise, but smokers could not buy as many cigarettes, so total tobacco consumption fell. \n\nFree and subsidized branded cigarettes were distributed to soldiers on both sides during World War II , as part of rations. Smoking rates rose more rapidly during war than in peacetime, including among women. Serving in the military, participating in military deployments, and physical and mental disability all make people more likely to smoke. Generally, people who are already stressed, anxious, depressed, or otherwise suffering from poor moods become addicted more easily and find quitting more difficult. This is thought to be because nicotine withdrawal worsens mood in smokers, with a nicotine hit briefly bringing mood back to baseline; if, due to pre-existing mood problems, the baseline is lower, then the withdrawal is worse still. \n\nSmoking was common in the Wehrmacht ; a 1944 survey found that 87% of servicemen smoked. 10% of servicemen had begun smoking while in the military, and only seven servicemen of the thousand surveyed (0.7%) had given it up. However, as in the general population, the number of smokers rose while the number of cigarettes smoked fell. As a result of the anti-tobacco measures implemented in the Wehrmacht (supply restriction, taxes, and propaganda), the total tobacco consumption by soldiers decreased between 1939 and 1945. Average tobacco consumption per person among military personnel declined by 23.4% compared to the immediate pre-World War II years. The number of servicemen who smoked 30 or more cigarettes per day (well above the theoretical maximum military ration of 7.7 cigarettes per day) declined from 4.4% to 0.3%. \n\nApart from public health concerns, the Nazis were heavily influenced by ideology; specifically, the movement was influenced by concepts of \" racial hygiene \" and bodily purity. Some Nazi leaders believed that it was wrong for the \" master race \" to smoke and that tobacco consumption was equal to \"racial degeneracy\". Tobacco-caused infertility and hereditary damage (described in now-obsolete terms as \"corrupt[ion]\" of the \" germ plasm \") were considered problematic by the Nazis on the grounds that they harmed German \" racial hygiene \". \n\nNazi anti-tobacco activists often tried to depict tobacco as a vice of \"the degenerate Negroes \". The Nazis claimed that Jews were responsible for introducing tobacco and its harmful effects. The Seventh-day Adventist Church in Germany announced that smoking was an unhealthy vice spread by Jews. During the opening ceremony of the aforementioned Wissenschaftliches Institut zur Erforschung der Tabakgefahren in 1941, Johann von Leers , editor of the Nordische Welt (Nordic World), proclaimed that \"Jewish capitalism\" was responsible for the spread of tobacco use across Europe . He said that the first tobacco on German soil was brought by the Jews and that they controlled the tobacco industry in Amsterdam , the principal European entry point of Nicotiana . \n\nAfter the collapse of Nazi Germany at the end of World War II , illegal smuggling of tobacco became prevalent, and the anti-smoking campaign started by the Nazis ceased to exist. In 1949, approximately 400 million cigarettes manufactured in the United States entered Germany illegally every month. In 1954, nearly two billion Swiss cigarettes were smuggled into Germany and Italy . As part of the Marshall Plan , the United States paid to send tobacco to Germany free of charge; the amount of tobacco shipped into Germany in 1948 was 24,000 tons and was as high as 69,000 tons in 1949. Post-war consumption in Germany remained initially low, due to poverty. As this poverty gave way to the Wirtschaftswunder , per capita yearly cigarette consumption in post-war Germany steadily rose from 460 in 1950 to 1,523 in 1963.\n\nNazi-related rhetoric associating anti-smoking measures with fascism has been fairly widely used in nicotine marketing (except in Germany, where such comparisons have brought strong reactions). Historical research has been quoted in a selective manner, which has been criticized by the quoted historians. In the early 21st century, this Nazi rhetoric may be being supplanted by Taliban -related rhetoric associating anti-smoking measures with theocracy . \n\nIt has been argued that the Nazi anti-tobacco campaigns delayed effective nicotine addiction reduction measures by decades. At the end of the 20th century, the anti-tobacco campaign in Germany was unable to approach the level of the Nazi-era climax in the years 1939–41, and German tobacco health research was described by Robert N. Proctor as \"muted\". Modern Germany has some of Europe's least restrictive tobacco control policies, and more Germans both smoke and die of it in consequence, which also leads to higher public health costs. ",
  "Peire Rogier [ a ] (born c. 1145) was a twelfth-century Auvergnat troubadour ( fl. 1160 – 1180) and cathedral canon from Clermont . He left his cathedral to become a travelling minstrel before settling down for a time in Narbonne at the court of Viscountess Ermengard . His life and career are known because his late thirteenth-century vida survives, as well as some of his works. The reliability of his vida , upon which all the details of his goings and comings are known, however, is not complete. According to it, he left the religious life to become a jongleur .\n\nHe fell in love with his hostess and patron and wrote many songs in her honour, giving Ermengard the nickname Tort-n'avetz (\"You are wrong\"), but for what reasons is unknown. Eventually the people of the Narbonnaise believed that he was in a sexual relationship with the viscountess and so she asked him to leave. He moved on to the court of Raimbaut d'Aurenga , where he also remained for a long time. From Raimbaut's court he moved on to sojourn at that of Alfonso VIII of Castile , then that of Alfonso II of Aragon , and finally that of Raymond V of Toulouse , where he arrived circa 1170. According to his vida , he became much esteemed as a troubadour through his travels, but there is no evidence otherwise for any movements in Spain, except perhaps the assembly of troubadours at the court of Aragon mentioned in a work of Peire d'Alvernhe (which need not have taken place). He entered the Order of Grandmont before his death. \n\nPeire Rogier's style of courtly love poetry is of the extremely reverent variety, in which the man submits completely to his lady and she is a paragon of virtue and courtliness (though the word cortezia is absent from his surviving works). She can by mere words convert a boorish man into a courtly one. Love need not be physical to be enjoyed and suffering on behalf of one's lady is considered pleasure. From one of his works:\n\nTant ai mon cor en joy assis, per que no puesc mudar no'n chan, que joys m'a noirit pauc e gran; e ses luy non seria res, qu'assatz vey que tot l'als qu'om fay abaiss' e sordey' e dechai, mas so qu'amors e joys soste.\n\nMy heart is so fixed on joy that I cannot help but sing, for as a child and an adult, joy has nourished me. Without it, I’d be nothing. I see that everything else that people do degrades, dishonors, and defames if love and joy do not sustain it. \n\nHe has been alleged as the author of the Roman de Flamenca , but as this was written around 1234–1235, he would have done so while about ninety years of age, which is hardly likely. However, the author of the Flamenca probably imitated the dialogue of Peire Rogier's poems. As the originator of internal dialogue in the troubadour lyric, Peire Rogier was also imitated by Guiraut de Bornelh .",
  "Private press publishing, with respect to books, is an endeavor performed by craft-based expert or aspiring artisans, either amateur or professional, who, among other things, print and build books, typically by hand, with emphasis on design , graphics , layout , fine printing , binding , covers , paper, stitching, and the like.\n\nThe term \"private press\" is not synonymous with \" fine press \", \" small press \", or \" university press \" – though there are similarities. One similarity shared by all is that they need not meet higher commercial thresholds of commercial presses. Private presses, however, often have no profit motive. A similarity shared with fine and small presses , but not university presses , is that for various reasons – namely quality – production quantity is often limited. University presses are typically more automated. A distinguishing quality of private presses is that they enjoy sole discretion over literary, scientific, artistic, and aesthetic merits. Criteria for other types of presses vary. From an aesthetic perspective, critical acclaim and public appreciation of artisans' works from private presses is somewhat analogous to that of luthiers ' works of fine string instruments and bows .\n\nThe private press movement, and its renowned body of work – relative to the larger world of book arts in Western civilization – is narrow and recent. From one perspective, collections relating to book arts date back to before the High Middle Ages . As an illustration of scope and influence, a 1980 exhibition at the Catholic University of America , \"The Monastic Imprint,\" highlighted the influence of book arts and textual scholarship from 1200 to 1980, displaying hundreds of diplomas, manuscript codices , incunabula , printed volumes, and calligraphic and private press ephemera . The displays focused on five areas: (1) Medieval Monasticism , Spirituality, and Scribal Culture, A.D. 1200–1500; (2) Early Printing and the Monastic Scholarly Tradition, ca. 1450–1600; (3) Early modern Monastic Printing and Scholarly Publishing, A.D. 1650–1800; (4) Modern Survivals: Monastic Scriptoria, Private Presses, and Academic Publishing, 1800–1980. \n\nThe earliest descriptive references to private presses were by Bernardus A. Mallinckrodt of Mainz , Germany, in De ortu ac progressu artis typographicae dissertatio historica (Cologne, 1639). The earliest in-depth writing about private presses was by Adam Heinrich Lackmann (de) (1694–1754) in Annalium Typographicorum, Selecta Quaedam Capita (Hamburg, 1740). \n\nThe term \"private press\" is often used to refer to a movement in book production which flourished around the turn of the 20th century under the influence of the scholar-artisans William Morris , Sir Emery Walker and their followers. The movement is often considered to have begun with the founding of Morris' Kelmscott Press in 1890, following a lecture on printing given by Walker at the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society in November 1888. Morris decried that the Industrial Revolution had ruined man's joy in work and that mechanization, to the extent that it has replaced handicraft, had brought ugliness with it. Those involved in the private press movement created books by traditional printing and binding methods, with an emphasis on the book as a work of art and manual skill, as well as a medium for the transmission of information. Morris was greatly influenced by medieval codices and early printed books and the 'Kelmscott style' had a great, and not always positive, influence on later private presses and commercial book-design. The movement was an offshoot of the Arts and Crafts movement , and represented a rejection of the cheap mechanised book-production methods which developed in the Victorian era. The books were made with high-quality materials (handmade paper, traditional inks and, in some cases, specially designed typefaces), and were often bound by hand. Careful consideration was given to format, page design, type, illustration and binding, to produce a unified whole. The movement dwindled during the worldwide depression of the 1930s, as the market for luxury goods evaporated. Since the 1950s, there has been a resurgence of interest, especially among artists, in the experimental use of letterpress printing , paper-making and hand-bookbinding in producing small editions of 'artists' books', and among amateur (and a few professional) enthusiasts for traditional printing methods and for the production 'values' of the private press movement. \n\nIn New Zealand university private presses have been significant in the private press movement. Private presses are active at three New Zealand universities: Auckland ( Holloway Press ), Victoria (Wai-te-ata Press ) and Otago (Otakou Press ).\n\nA 1982 Newsweek article about the rebirth of the hand press movement asserted that Harry Duncan was \"considered the father of the post- World War II private-press movement.\" Will Ransom has been credited as the father of American private press historiographers . \n\nBeyond aesthetics, private presses, historically, have served other needs. John Hunter (1728–1793), a Scottish surgeon and medical researcher, established a private press in 1786 at his house at 13 Castle Street, Leicester Square , in West End of London , in an attempt to prevent unauthorized publication of cheap and foreign editions of his works. His first book from his private press: A Treatise on the Venereal Disease. One thousand copies of the first edition were printed. \n\nPorter Garnett (1871–1951), of Carnegie Mellon University , was an exponent of the anti-industrial values [ vague ] of the great private presses – namely those of Kelmscott , Doves , and Ashendene . Following Garnett's inspirational proposal to Carnegie Mellon , Garnett designed and inaugurated on April 7, 1923, the institute's Laboratory Press – for the purpose of teaching printing, which he believed was the first private press devoted solely for that purpose. The press closed in 1935. \n\nWilliam Addison Dwiggins (1880–1956), a commercial artist, is lauded for high quality work, namely with Alfred Knopf . And, in contrast to many first-rate book designers joining private presses, he refused. Historian Paul Shaw explained, \"He had no patience with those who insisted on retaining hand processes in printing and publishing in the belief that they were inherently superior to machine processes.\" Dwiggins's \"principal concern ultimately centered on readers and their reading needs, esthetic as well as financial. [His] goal was to make books that were beautiful, functional, and inexpensive.\" \n\nincluding:",
  "The Council of Government of the Region of Murcia ( Spanish : Consejo de Gobierno de la Región de Murcia ) is the collegiate body charged with the executive and administrative functions of the autonomous community of the Region of Murcia , Spain . \n\nIt is headed by the president of the Region of Murcia , and additionally includes the appointed vice presidents and consejeros (cabinet ministers). \n\nThe cabinet ceases in office after the holding of legislative elections, remaining in a caretaking role until a new cabinet assumes office. \n\nIts main headquarters are located at the Palace of Saint Esteban ( Palacio de San Esteban ), in Murcia .",
  "Jean-Philippe Rameau ( / r ɑː ˈ m oʊ / ; French: [ʒɑ̃filip ʁamo] ; ( 1683-09-25 ) 25 September 1683 – ( 1764-09-12 ) 12 September 1764) was a French composer and music theorist . Regarded as one of the most important French composers and music theorists of the 18th century, he replaced Jean-Baptiste Lully as the dominant composer of French opera and is also considered the leading French composer of his time for the harpsichord , alongside François Couperin . \n\nLittle is known about Rameau's early years. It was not until the 1720s that he won fame as a major theorist of music with his Treatise on Harmony (1722) and also in the following years as a composer of masterpieces for the harpsichord, which circulated throughout Europe . He was almost 50 before he embarked on the operatic career on which his reputation chiefly rests today. His debut, Hippolyte et Aricie (1733), caused a great stir and was fiercely attacked by the supporters of Lully's style of music for its revolutionary use of harmony.\n\nNevertheless, Rameau's pre-eminence in the field of French opera was soon acknowledged, and he was later attacked as an \"establishment\" composer by those who favoured Italian opera during the controversy known as the Querelle des Bouffons in the 1750s. Rameau's music had gone out of fashion by the end of the 18th century, and it was not until the 20th that serious efforts were made to revive it. Today, he enjoys renewed appreciation with performances and recordings of his music ever more frequent.\n\nThe details of Rameau's life are generally obscure, especially concerning his first forty years, before he moved to Paris for good. He was a secretive man, and even his wife nor his four children knew anything of his early life, which explains the scarcity of biographical information available.\n\nRameau's early years are particularly obscure. He was born on 25 September 1683 in Dijon , and baptised the same day. His father, Jean, worked as an organist in several churches around Dijon, and his mother, Claudine Demartinécourt, was the daughter of a notary . The couple had eleven children, five girls and six boys, of whom Jean-Philippe was the seventh.\n\nRameau was taught music before he could read or write. He was educated at the Jesuit college at Godrans in Dijon, but he was not a good pupil and disrupted classes with his singing, later claiming that his passion for opera had begun at the age of twelve. Initially intended for the law, Rameau decided he wanted to be a musician, and his father sent him to Italy, where he stayed for a short while in Milan . On his return, he worked as a violinist in travelling companies, and then as an organist in provincial cathedrals, before moving to Paris for the first time. There, in 1706, he published his earliest-known compositions: the harpsichord works that make up his first book of Pièces de Clavecin , which show the influence of his friend Louis Marchand . \n\nIn 1709, he moved back to Dijon to take over his father's job as organist in the main church. The contract was for six years, but Rameau left before then and took up similar posts in Lyon and Clermont-Ferrand . During that period, he composed motets for church performance as well as secular cantatas .\n\nIn 1722, he returned to Paris for good, and there he published his most important work of music theory, Traité de l'harmonie ( Treatise on Harmony ). That soon won him a great reputation, and it was followed in 1726 by his Nouveau système de musique théorique . In 1724 and 1729 (or 1730), he also published two more collections of harpsichord pieces. \n\nRameau took his first tentative steps into composing stage music when the writer Alexis Piron asked him to provide songs for his popular comic plays written for the Paris Fairs. Four collaborations followed, beginning with L'endriague in 1723, but none of the music has survived. \n\nOn 25 February 1726, Rameau married the 19-year-old Marie-Louise Mangot, who came from a musical family from Lyon, and was a good singer and instrumentalist. The couple had four children, two boys and two girls, and the marriage is said to have been a happy one. \n\nIn spite of his fame as a music theorist, Rameau had trouble finding a post as an organist in Paris. \n\nIt was not until he was approaching 50 that Rameau decided to embark on the operatic career on which his fame as a composer mainly rests. He had already approached writer Antoine Houdar de la Motte for a libretto in 1727, but nothing came of it; he was finally inspired to try his hand at the prestigious genre of tragédie en musique after seeing Montéclair 's Jephté in 1732. Rameau's Hippolyte et Aricie premiered at the Académie Royale de Musique on 1 October 1733. It was immediately recognised as the most significant opera to appear in France since the death of Lully , though its reception drew controversy. Some, such as the composer André Campra , were stunned by its originality and wealth of invention; others found its harmonic innovations discordant and saw the work as an attack on the French musical tradition. The two camps, the so-called Lullyistes and the Rameauneurs, fought a pamphlet war over the issue for the rest of the decade. \n\nJust before that, Rameau had made the acquaintance of the powerful financier Alexandre Le Riche de La Poupelinière , who became his patron until 1753. La Poupelinière's mistress (and later, wife), Thérèse des Hayes , was Rameau's pupil and a great admirer of his music. In 1731, Rameau became the conductor of La Poupelinière's private orchestra, which was of an extremely high quality. He held the post for 22 years, and was succeeded by Johann Stamitz and then François-Joseph Gossec . La Poupelinière's salon enabled Rameau to meet some of the leading cultural figures of the day, including Voltaire , who soon began collaborating with the composer. Their first project, the tragédie en musique Samson , was abandoned because an opera on a religious theme by Voltaire—a notorious critic of the Church—was likely to be banned by the authorities. Meanwhile, Rameau had introduced his new musical style into the lighter genre of the opéra-ballet with the highly successful Les Indes galantes . It was followed by two tragédies en musique , Castor et Pollux (1737) and Dardanus (1739), and another opéra-ballet , Les fêtes d'Hébé (also 1739). All those operas of the 1730s are among Rameau's most highly regarded works. However, the composer followed them with six years of silence, during which the only work he produced was a new version of Dardanus (1744). The reason for the interval in the composer's creative life is unknown, although it is possible he had a falling-out with the authorities at the Académie royale de la musique. \n\nThe year 1745 was a turning point in Rameau's career. He received several commissions from the court for works to celebrate the French victory at the Battle of Fontenoy and the marriage of the Dauphin to Infanta Maria Teresa Rafaela of Spain . Rameau produced his most important comic opera, Platée , as well as two collaborations with Voltaire: the opéra-ballet Le temple de la gloire and the comédie-ballet La princesse de Navarre . They gained Rameau official recognition; he was granted the title \"Compositeur du Cabinet du Roi\" and given a substantial pension. 1745 also saw the beginning of the bitter enmity between Rameau and Jean-Jacques Rousseau . Though best known today as a thinker, Rousseau had ambitions to be a composer. He had written an opera, Les muses galantes (inspired by Rameau's Indes galantes ), but Rameau was unimpressed by this musical tribute. At the end of 1745, Voltaire and Rameau, who were busy on other works, commissioned Rousseau to turn La Princesse de Navarre into a new opera, with linking recitative , called Les fêtes de Ramire . Rousseau then claimed the two had stolen the credit for the words and music he had contributed, though musicologists have been able to identify almost nothing of the piece as Rousseau's work. Nevertheless, the embittered Rousseau nursed a grudge against Rameau for the rest of his life. \n\nRousseau was a major participant in the second great quarrel that erupted over Rameau's work, the so-called Querelle des Bouffons of 1752–54, which pitted French tragédie en musique against Italian opera buffa . This time, Rameau was accused of being out of date and his music too complicated in comparison with the simplicity and \"naturalness\" of a work like Pergolesi's La serva padrona . In the mid-1750s, Rameau criticised Rousseau's contributions to the musical articles in the Encyclopédie , which led to a quarrel with the leading philosophes d'Alembert and Diderot . As a result, Jean-François Rameau became a character in Diderot's then-unpublished dialogue, Le neveu de Rameau ( Rameau's Nephew ).\n\nIn 1753, La Poupelinière took a scheming musician, Jeanne-Thérèse Goermans , as his mistress. The daughter of harpsichord maker Jacques Goermans , she went by the name of Madame de Saint-Aubin , and her opportunistic husband pushed her into the arms of the rich financier. She had La Poupelinière engage the services of the Bohemian composer Johann Stamitz , who succeeded Rameau after a breach developed between Rameau and his patron. By then, however, Rameau no longer needed La Poupelinière's financial support and protection.\n\nRameau pursued his activities as a theorist and composer until his death. He lived with his wife and two of his children in his large suite of rooms in Rue des Bons-Enfants, which he would leave every day, lost in thought, to take a solitary walk in the nearby gardens of the Palais-Royal or the Tuileries. Sometimes he would meet the young writer Chabanon , who noted some of Rameau's disillusioned confidential remarks: \"Day by day, I'm acquiring more good taste, but I no longer have any genius\" and \"The imagination is worn out in my old head; it's not wise at this age wanting to practise arts that are nothing but imagination.\" \n\nRameau composed prolifically in the late 1740s and early 1750s. After that, his rate of productivity dropped off, probably due to old age and ill health, although he was still able to write another comic opera, Les Paladins , in 1760. That as due to be followed by a final tragédie en musique, Les Boréades but, for unknown reasons, the opera was never produced and did not get a proper staging unil the late 20th century. Rameau died on 12 September 1764 after suffering from a fever, thirteen days before his 81st birthday. At his bedside, he objected to a song being sung. His last words were, \"What the devil do you mean to sing to me, priest? You are out of tune.\" He was buried in the church of St. Eustache , Paris on the same day of his death. Although a bronze bust and red marble tombstone were erected in his memory there by the Société de la Compositeurs de Musique in 1883, the exact site of his burial remains unknown to this day.\n\nWhile the details of his biography are vague and fragmentary, the details of Rameau's personal and family life are almost completely obscure. Rameau's music, so graceful and attractive, completely contradicts the man's public image and what we know of his character as described (or perhaps unfairly caricatured) by Diderot in his satirical novel Le Neveu de Rameau . Throughout his life, music was his consuming passion. It occupied his entire thinking; Philippe Beaussant calls him a monomaniac. Alexis Piron explained that \"His heart and soul were in his harpsichord; once he had shut its lid, there was no one home.\" Physically, Rameau was tall and exceptionally thin, as can be seen by the sketches we have of him, including a famous portrait by Carmontelle . He had a \"loud voice\". His speech was difficult to understand, just like his handwriting, which was never fluent. As a man, he was secretive, solitary, irritable, proud of his own achievements (more as a theorist than as a composer), brusque with those who contradicted him, and quick to anger. It is difficult to imagine him among the leading wits, including Voltaire (to whom he bears more than a passing physical resemblance ), who frequented La Poupelinière's salon; his music was his passport, and it made up for his lack of social graces.\n\nHis enemies exaggerated his faults, e.g. his supposed miserliness. In fact, it seems that his thriftiness was the result of long years spent in obscurity, when his income was uncertain and scanty, rather than being part of his character, because he could also be generous. He helped his nephew Jean-François when he came to Paris and also helped establish the career of Claude-Bénigne Balbastre in the capital. Furthermore, he gave his daughter Marie-Louise a considerable dowry when she became a Visitandine nun in 1750, and he paid a pension to one of his sisters when she became ill. Financial security came late to him, following the success of his stage works and the grant of a royal pension. A few months before his death, he was ennobled and made a knight of the Ordre de Saint-Michel. But he did not change his way of life, keeping his worn-out clothes, his single pair of shoes, and his old furniture. After his death, it was discovered that he possessed only one dilapidated single-keyboard harpsichord in his rooms in Rue des Bons-Enfants, yet he also had a bag containing 1691 gold louis . \n\nRameau's music is characterised by the exceptional technical knowledge of a composer who wanted above all to be renowned as a theorist of the art. Nevertheless, it is not solely addressed to the intelligence, and Rameau himself claimed, \"I try to conceal art with art.\" The paradox of this music was that it was new, using techniques never known before, but it took place within the framework of old-fashioned forms. Rameau appeared revolutionary to the Lullyistes, disturbed by complex harmony of his music; and reactionary to the philosophes , who only paid attention to its content and who either would not or could not listen to the sound it made. The incomprehension Rameau received from his contemporaries stopped him from repeating such daring experiments as the second Trio des Parques in Hippolyte et Aricie , which he was forced to remove after a handful of performances because the singers had been either unable or unwilling to execute it correctly.\n\nRameau's musical works may be divided into four distinct groups, which differ greatly in importance: a few cantatas ; a few motets for large chorus; some pieces for solo harpsichord or harpsichord accompanied by other instruments; and, finally, his works for the stage, to which he dedicated the last thirty years of his career almost exclusively. Like most of his contemporaries, Rameau often reused melodies that had been particularly successful, but never without meticulously adapting them; they are not simple transcriptions. Besides, no borrowings have been found from other composers, although his earliest works show the influence of other music. Rameau's reworkings of his own material are numerous; e.g., in Les Fêtes d'Hébé , we find L'Entretien des Muses , the Musette, and the Tambourin, taken from the 1724 book of harpsichord pieces, as well as an aria from the cantata Le Berger Fidèle . \n\nFor at least 26 years, Rameau was a professional organist in the service of religious institutions, and yet the body of sacred music he composed is exceptionally small and his organ works nonexistent. Judging by the evidence, it was not his favourite field, but rather, simply a way of making reasonable money. Rameau's few religious compositions are nevertheless remarkable and compare favourably to the works of specialists in the area. Only four motets have been attributed to Rameau with any certainty: Deus noster refugium , In convertendo , Quam dilecta , and Laboravi . \n\nThe cantata was a highly successful genre in the early 18th century. The French cantata, which should not be confused with the Italian or the German cantata, was \"invented\" in 1706 by the poet Jean-Baptiste Rousseau and soon taken up by many famous composers of the day, such as Montéclair , Campra , and Clérambault . Cantatas were Rameau's first contact with dramatic music. The modest forces the cantata required meant it was a genre within the reach of a composer who was still unknown. Musicologists can only guess at the dates of Rameau's six surviving cantatas, and the names of the librettists are unknown. \n\nAlong with François Couperin , Rameau was a master of the 18th-century French school of harpsichord music, and both made a break with the style of the first generation of harpsichordists whose compositions adhered to the relatively standardised suite form, which had reached its apogee in the first decade of the 18th century and successive collections of pieces by Louis Marchand , Gaspard Le Roux , Louis-Nicolas Clérambault , Jean-François Dandrieu , Élisabeth Jacquet de la Guerre , Charles Dieupart and Nicolas Siret . Rameau and Couperin had different styles, and it seems they did not know one another: Couperin was one of the official court musicians; Rameau, fifteen years his junior, achieved fame only after Couperin's death.\n\nRameau published his first book of harpsichord pieces in 1706. (Cf. Couperin, who waited until 1713 before publishing his first \"Ordres\".) Rameau's music includes pieces in the pure tradition of the French suite: imitative (\"Le rappel des oiseaux\", \"La poule\") and characterful (\"Les tendres plaintes\", \"L'entretien des Muses\"). But there are also works of pure virtuosity that resemble Domenico Scarlatti (\"Les tourbillons\", \"Les trois mains\") as well as pieces that reveal the experiments of a theorist and musical innovator (\"L'enharmonique\", \"Les Cyclopes\"), which had a marked influence on Louis-Claude Daquin , Joseph-Nicolas-Pancrace Royer and Jacques Duphly . Rameau's suites are grouped in the traditional way, by key. The first set of dances (Allemande, Courante, Sarabande, Les Trois Mains, Fanfairenette, La Triomphante, Gavotte et 6 doubles) is centred on A major and A minor, while the remaining pieces (Les tricoteuses, L'Indifferente, Première Menuet, Deuxième Menuet, La Poule, Les Triolets, Les Sauvages, L'Enharmonique, L'Egiptienne [sic]) are centred around G major and G minor.\n\nRameau's second and third collections appeared in 1724 and 1727. After these he composed only one piece for the harpsichord, the eight-minute \"La Dauphine\" of 1747, while the very short \"Les petits marteaux\" (c. 1750) has also been attributed to him.\n\nDuring his semiretirement (1740 to 1744) he wrote the Pièces de clavecin en concerts (1741), which some musicologists consider the pinnacle of French Baroque chamber music. Adopting a formula successfully employed by Mondonville a few years earlier, Rameau fashioned these pieces differently from trio sonatas in that the harpsichord is not simply there as basso continuo to accompany melody instruments (violin, flute, viol) but as equal partner in \"concert\" with them. Rameau claimed that this music would be equally satisfying played on the harpsichord alone, but the claim is not wholly convincing because he took the trouble to transcribe five of them himself, those the lack of other instruments would show the least. \n\nAfter 1733 Rameau dedicated himself mostly to opera. On a strictly musical level, 18th-century French Baroque opera is richer and more varied than contemporary Italian opera, especially in the place given to choruses and dances but also in the musical continuity that arises from the respective relationships between the arias and the recitatives . Another essential difference: whereas Italian opera gave a starring role to female sopranos and castrati , French opera had no use for the latter. The Italian opera of Rameau's day ( opera seria , opera buffa ) was essentially divided into musical sections ( da capo arias, duets, trios, etc.) and sections that were spoken or almost spoken ( recitativo secco ). It was during the latter that the action progressed while the audience waited for the next aria; on the other hand, the text of the arias was almost entirely buried beneath music whose chief aim was to show off the virtuosity of the singer. Nothing of the kind is to be found in French opera of the day; since Lully, the text had to remain comprehensible—limiting certain techniques such as the vocalise , which was reserved for special words such as gloire (\"glory\") or victoire (\"victory\"). A subtle equilibrium existed between the more and the less musical parts: melodic recitative on the one hand and arias that were often closer to arioso on the other, alongside virtuoso \"ariettes\" in the Italian style. This form of continuous music prefigures Wagnerian drama even more than does the \"reform\" opera of Gluck .\n\nFive essential components may be discerned in Rameau's operatic scores:\n\nRameau was the greatest ballet composer of all times. The genius of his creation rests on one hand on his perfect artistic permeation by folk-dance types, on the other hand on the constant preservation of living contact with the practical requirements of the ballet stage, which prevented an estrangement between the expression of the body from the spirit of absolute music . \n\nDuring the first part of his operatic career (1733–1739), Rameau wrote his great masterpieces destined for the Académie royale de musique: three tragédies en musique and two opéra-ballets that still form the core of his repertoire. After the interval of 1740 to 1744, he became the official court musician, and for the most part, composed pieces intended to entertain, with plenty of dance music emphasising sensuality and an idealised pastoral atmosphere. In his last years, Rameau returned to a renewed version of his early style in Les Paladins and Les Boréades .\n\nHis Zoroastre was first performed in 1749. According to one of Rameau's admirers, Cuthbert Girdlestone, this opera has a distinctive place in his works: \"The profane passions of hatred and jealousy are rendered more intensely [than in his other works] and with a strong sense of reality.\"\n\nUnlike Lully, who collaborated with Philippe Quinault on almost all his operas, Rameau rarely worked with the same librettist twice. He was highly demanding and bad-tempered, unable to maintain longstanding partnerships with his librettists, with the exception of Louis de Cahusac , who collaborated with him on several operas, including Les fêtes de l'Hymen et de l'Amour (1747), Zaïs (1748), Naïs (1749), Zoroastre (1749; revised 1756), La naissance d'Osiris (1754), and Anacréon (the first of Rameau's operas by that name, 1754). He is also credited with writing the libretto of Rameau's final work, Les Boréades (c. 1763).\n\nMany Rameau specialists have regretted that the collaboration with Houdar de la Motte never took place, and that the Samson project with Voltaire came to nothing because the librettists Rameau did work with were second-rate. He made his acquaintance of most of them at La Poupelinière 's salon, at the Société du Caveau [ fr ] , or at the house of the comte de Livry, all meeting places for leading cultural figures of the day.\n\nNot one of his librettists managed to produce a libretto on the same artistic level as Rameau's music: the plots were often overly complex or unconvincing. But this was standard for the genre, and is probably part of its charm. The versification, too, was mediocre, and Rameau often had to have the libretto modified and rewrite the music after the premiere because of the ensuing criticism. This is why we have two versions of Castor et Pollux (1737 and 1754) and three of Dardanus (1739, 1744, and 1760).\n\nBy the end of his life, Rameau's music had come under attack in France from theorists who favoured Italian models. However, foreign composers working in the Italian tradition were increasingly looking towards Rameau as a way of reforming their own leading operatic genre, opera seria . Tommaso Traetta produced two operas setting translations of Rameau libretti that show the French composer's influence, Ippolito ed Aricia (1759) and I Tintaridi (based on Castor et Pollux , 1760). Traetta had been advised by Count Francesco Algarotti , a leading proponent of reform according to French models; Algarotti was a major influence on the most important \"reformist\" composer, Christoph Willibald Gluck . Gluck's three Italian reform operas of the 1760s— Orfeo ed Euridice , Alceste , and Paride ed Elena —reveal a knowledge of Rameau's works. For instance, both Orfeo and the 1737 version of Castor et Pollux open with the funeral of one of the leading characters who later comes back to life. Many of the operatic reforms advocated in the preface to Gluck's Alceste were already present in Rameau's works. Rameau had used accompanied recitatives, and the overtures in his later operas reflected the action to come, so when Gluck arrived in Paris in 1774 to produce a series of six French operas, he could be seen as continuing in the tradition of Rameau. Nevertheless, while Gluck's popularity survived the French Revolution , Rameau's did not. By the end of the 18th century, his operas had vanished from the repertoire. \n\nFor most of the 19th century, Rameau's music remained unplayed, known only by reputation. Hector Berlioz investigated Castor et Pollux and particularly admired the aria \"Tristes apprêts\", but \"whereas the modern listener readily perceives the common ground with Berlioz' music, he himself was more conscious of the gap which separated them.\" French humiliation in the Franco-Prussian War brought about a change in Rameau's fortunes. As Rameau biographer Jean Malignon wrote, \"...the German victory over France in 1870–71 was the grand occasion for digging up great heroes from the French past. Rameau, like so many others, was flung into the enemy's face to bolster our courage and our faith in the national destiny of France.\" In 1894, composer Vincent d'Indy founded the Schola Cantorum to promote French national music; the society put on several revivals of works by Rameau. Among the audience was Claude Debussy , who especially cherished Castor et Pollux , revived in 1903: \" Gluck 's genius was deeply rooted in Rameau's works... a detailed comparison allows us to affirm that Gluck could replace Rameau on the French stage only by assimilating the latter's beautiful works and making them his own.\" Camille Saint-Saëns (by editing and publishing the Pièces in 1895) and Paul Dukas were two other important French musicians who gave practical championship to Rameau's music in their day, but interest in Rameau petered out again, and it was not until the late 20th century that a serious effort was made to revive his works. Over half of Rameau's operas have now been recorded, in particular by conductors such as John Eliot Gardiner , William Christie , and Marc Minkowski .\n\nOne of his pieces is commonly heard in the Victoria Centre in Nottingham by the Rowland Emett timepiece, the Aqua Horological Tintinnabulator . Emett quoted that Rameau made music for his school and the shopping centre without him knowing it.\n\nRameau's 1722 Treatise on Harmony initiated a revolution in music theory. Rameau posited the discovery of the \"fundamental law\" or what he referred to as the \"fundamental bass\" of all Western music. Heavily influenced by new Cartesian modes of thought and analysis, Rameau's methodology incorporated mathematics, commentary, analysis and a didacticism that was specifically intended to illuminate, scientifically, the structure and principles of music. With careful deductive reasoning, he attempted to derive universal harmonic principles from natural causes. Previous treatises on harmony had been purely practical; Rameau embraced the new philosophical rationalism, quickly rising to prominence in France as the \" Isaac Newton of Music\". His fame subsequently spread throughout all Europe, and his Treatise became the definitive authority on music theory, forming the foundation for instruction in western music that persists to this day.\n\nRCT numbering refers to Rameau Catalogue Thématique established by Sylvie Bouissou and Denis Herlin. \n\nMusic mostly lost.\n\nNotes\n\nSources\n\nSheet music",
  "The Eleventh Amendment ( Amendment XI ) is an amendment to the United States Constitution which was passed by Congress on March 4, 1794, and ratified by the states on February 7, 1795. The Eleventh Amendment restricts the ability of individuals to bring suit against states of which they are not citizens in federal court .\n\nThe Eleventh Amendment was adopted to overrule the Supreme Court 's decision in Chisholm v. Georgia (1793). In that case, the Court held that states did not enjoy sovereign immunity from suits made by citizens of other states in federal court. Although the Eleventh Amendment established that federal courts do not have the authority to hear cases brought by private parties against a state of which they are not citizens, the Supreme Court has ruled the amendment applies to all federal suits against states brought by private parties. The Supreme Court has also held that Congress can abrogate state sovereign immunity when using its authority under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment . Other recent cases ( Torres v. Texas Department of Public Safety , Central Virginia Community College v. Katz , PennEast Pipeline Co. v. New Jersey ) have identified further exceptions to the general sovereign immunity of states when Congress acts pursuant to its Article I powers, which have alternatively been referred to as \"waivers in the plan of the Convention \". The Supreme Court has also held that federal courts can enjoin state officials from violating federal law.\n\nThe Judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State.\n\nThe Eleventh Amendment was the first Constitutional amendment adopted after the Bill of Rights . The amendment was adopted following the Supreme Court's ruling in Chisholm v. Georgia , 2 U.S. 419 (1793). In Chisholm , the Court ruled that federal courts had the authority to hear cases in law and equity brought by private citizens against states and that states did not enjoy sovereign immunity from suits made by citizens of other states in federal court. Thus, the amendment clarified Article III, Section 2 of the Constitution, which gives diversity jurisdiction to the judiciary to hear cases \"between a state and citizens of another state.\" \n\nThe Eleventh Amendment was proposed by the 3rd Congress on March 4, 1794, when it was approved by the House of Representatives by vote of 81–9, having been previously passed by the Senate , 23–2, on January 14, 1794. The amendment was ratified by the state legislatures of the following states: \n\nThere were fifteen states at the time; ratification by twelve added the Eleventh Amendment to the Constitution. ( South Carolina ratified it on December 4, 1797.)\n\nOn January 8, 1798, approximately three years after the Eleventh Amendment's actual adoption, President John Adams stated in a message to Congress that it had been ratified by the necessary number of states and was now a part of the Constitution. New Jersey and Pennsylvania did not take action on the amendment during that era; neither did Tennessee , which had become the 16th state on June 1, 1796. However, on June 25, 2018, the New Jersey Senate adopted Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 75 to ratify the Eleventh Amendment. \n\nAlmost exactly three years after its ratification, the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Hollingsworth v. Virginia , 3 U.S. 378 (1798) resulted in every pending action brought under Chisholm being dismissed due to the amendment's adoption.\n\nThe amendment's text does not mention suits brought against a state by its own citizens. However, in Hans v. Louisiana , 134 U.S. 1 (1890), the Supreme Court ruled that the amendment reflects a broader principle of sovereign immunity. As Justice Anthony Kennedy later stated in Alden v. Maine , 527 U.S. 706 (1999):\n\n[S]overeign immunity derives not from the Eleventh Amendment but from the structure of the original Constitution itself. ... Nor can we conclude that the specific Article I powers delegated to Congress necessarily include, by virtue of the Necessary and Proper Clause or otherwise, the incidental authority to subject the States to private suits as a means of achieving objectives otherwise within the scope of the enumerated powers.\n\nHowever, Justice David Souter , writing for a four-Justice dissent in Alden , said the states surrendered their sovereign immunity when they ratified the Constitution. He read the amendment's text as reflecting a narrow form of sovereign immunity that limited only the diversity jurisdiction of the federal courts. He concluded that neither the Eleventh Amendment in particular nor the Constitution in general insulates the states from suits by individuals. \n\nAlthough the Eleventh Amendment grants immunity to states from suit for money damages or equitable relief without their consent, in Ex parte Young , 209 U.S. 123 (1908), the Supreme Court ruled that federal courts may enjoin state officials from violating federal law. The Court's ruling in Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer , 427 U.S. 445 (1976) allows Congress to abrogate state immunity from suit under Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment ; this was broadened to include bankruptcy cases by Central Virginia Community College v. Katz , 546 U.S. 356 (2006), based on Article I, Section 8, Clause 4 of the Constitution. In Lapides v. Board of Regents of University System of Georgia , 535 U.S. 613 (2002), the Supreme Court ruled that when a state invokes a federal court's removal jurisdiction , it waives the Eleventh Amendment in the removed case.\n\nThe amendment's applicability to unincorporated U.S. territories, where constitutional rights do not fully apply , remained unclear for nearly two centuries after its ratification. In 1983, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the First Circuit ruled that Puerto Rico enjoys Eleventh Amendment immunity. However, subsequent rulings from other federal courts have determined that the other similarly unincorporated territories of American Samoa , Guam , Northern Mariana Islands and the Virgin Islands , do not enjoy Eleventh Amendment immunity. \n\nInternational law scholar Thomas H. Lee argues that foreign states were intended to be excluded from the Eleventh Amendment's prohibition—i.e., that foreign governments would still be permitted to sue state governments. However, in Principality of Monaco v. Mississippi , 292 U.S. 313 (1934), the Supreme Court ruled that the amendment also protects states from lawsuits by foreign entities, which Lee considers a departure from established jurisprudence; his thesis is that the Eleventh Amendment exempted foreign governments in order to allow recourse for violations of treaty obligations, which in turn promoted positive and peaceful foreign relations between a fledgling U.S. and the international community. Lee likewise argues that the Eleventh Amendment reflected the international legal principle of sovereign equality, whereby foreign states were of equal legal status to the U.S. states, and as such could bring lawsuits. ",
  "Castillo Ortega-Douglas (English: Ortega-Douglas Castle ), also known as Castillo Douglas , is a castle -like house in central Aguascalientes , Aguascalientes , Mexico . Designed by Federico Mariscal [ es ] and supervised by J. Refugio Reyes Rivas , it was built for Edmundo Ortega Douglas, whose maternal grandfather, John Douglas (1849–1918), had emigrated to Mexico from Scotland . The house is notable for having the features of a medieval castle, including a moat , a drawbridge , battlements , turrets , and a stained glass window .\n\n21°53′08″N 102°17′26″W ﻿ / ﻿ 21.8855°N 102.2906°W ﻿ / 21.8855; -102.2906\n\nThis article about a Mexican building or structure is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "A costume designer is a person who designs costumes for a film, stage production or television show. The role of the costume designer is to create the characters' outfits or costumes and balance the scenes with texture and colour, etc. The costume designer works alongside the director , scenic , lighting designer , sound designer, and other creative personnel. The costume designer may also collaborate with a hair stylist, wig master, or makeup artist. In European theatre, the role is different, as the theatre designer usually designs both costume and scenic elements.\n\nDesigners typically seek to enhance a character's personality, and to create an evolving plot of color, changing social status, or period through the visual design of garments and accessories. [ citation needed ] They may distort or enhance the body—within the boundaries of the director's vision. The designer must ensure that the designs let the actor move as the role requires. The actor must execute the director's blocking of the production without damaging the garments. Garments must be durable and washable, especially for plays with extended runs or films with near- real time pacing (meaning that most costumes will not change between scenes) but whose principal photography phase may stretch across several weeks. The designer must consult not only with the director, but the set and lighting designers to ensure that all elements of the overall production design work together. The designer must possess strong artistic capabilities and a thorough knowledge of pattern development, draping, drafting, textiles and fashion history. The designer must understand historical costuming, and the movement style and poise that period dress may require.\n\nDuring the late-19th century, company managers in the US usually selected costumes for a show. Many were pulled from a rental houses, only a few were designed. Though designers in other theatrical disciplines were recognized, few who specialized in costumes were. The few that were included Caroline Siedle , C. Wilhelm , Percy Anderson , and Mrs. John Alexander. They sometimes even received credit on the title page of a playbill rather than in the back. \n\nIn the 20th century, film costume designers like Edith Head and Adrian became well known. Edith Head (born Edith Claire Posener), went on and won eight Academy Awards for Best Costume Design between 1949 and 1973. Later, those working in television like Nolan Miller ( Dynasty ), Janie Bryant ( Mad Men ), and Patricia Field ( Sex and the City ) became more prominent, some becoming authors and having their own clothing and jewelry lines. \n\nProfessional costume designers generally fall into three types: freelance, residential, and academic.\n\nBoth residential and academic designers are generally also required to act as Shop Master or Mistress of an onsite costume shop, in addition to designing productions. In a resident theatre, there is almost always a shop staff of stitchers, drapers, cutters and craft artisans. In an academic environment the shop \"staff\" is generally students, who are learning about costume design and construction. Most universities require costume design students to work a specified number of hours in the shop as part of their course work.\n\nThe International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees is the sole union in the United States and Canada that represents costume designers. It has two local unions that costume designers can belong to:\n\nCostume Designers Guild, Local 892 is one union that represents Costume Designers, as well as United Scenic Artists . \n\nMany costumers belong to the Motion Picture Costumers Union, Local 705 and represent every position within the costume department (except the costume designer). Local 705 represents Costume Supervisors, Key Costumers, Costumers, Tailor/Seamstress, Ager/Dyer, Cutter/Fitters, Costume House Employees and Commercial Costumers. ",
  "Lamboing ( French pronunciation: [lɑ̃bwɛ̃] ) is a municipality in the Jura bernois administrative district in the canton of Bern in Switzerland , located in the French-speaking Bernese Jura ( Jura Bernois ).\n\nThe proposed merger of the municipalities of Diesse , Lamboing, Nods and Prêles into the new municipality of Le Plateau de Diesse was rejected by voters. However, on 1 January 2014 the former municipalities of Lamboing, Diesse and Prêles merged into the new municipality of Plateau de Diesse . \n\nLamboing is first mentioned in 1179 as Lamboens though this document is thought to be a forgery from the late 12th Century. In 1235 it was mentioned as Lamboens . \n\nThe noble de Lamboing family was first mentioned in a document from 1255. But very little is known about this family. In 1423 the de Vaumarcus family were given the village as a fief , which they held until 1509. In that year the village was acquired by the Prince-Bishopric of Basel who ruled over the village for almost three centuries. After the 1798 French invasion , Lamboing became part of the French Département of Mont-Terrible . Three years later, in 1800 it became part of the Département of Haut-Rhin . After Napoleon 's defeat and the Congress of Vienna , Lamboing was assigned to the Canton of Bern in 1815. A village school house was built in 1863. During the late 19th century a watchmaker's workshop opened in the village. It was acquired by the Ebauches SA company in 1926 and continued making components for watches until 1981. Beginning in the 1970s the village's population began to grow as commuters settled in Lamboing. \n\nIt has always been part of the parish of Diesse . When Diesse converted to the new faith of the Protestant Reformation between 1530 and 1554, Lamboing converted as well. \n\nBefore the merger, Lamboing had a total area of 9.1 km 2 (3.5 sq mi). As of 2012, a total of 3.56 km 2 (1.37 sq mi) or 39.1% is used for agricultural purposes, while 4.93 km 2 (1.90 sq mi) or 54.1% is forested. Of the rest of the land, 0.61 km 2 (0.24 sq mi) or 6.7% is settled (buildings or roads). \n\nDuring the same year, housing and buildings made up 3.2% and transportation infrastructure made up 2.9%. Out of the forested land, 50.5% of the total land area is heavily forested and 3.6% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 19.3% is used for growing crops and 9.9% is pastures and 9.1% is used for alpine pastures. \n\nThe former municipality is located on the Plateau de Diesse. It consists of the village of Lamboing and the hamlets of Les Moulins, Derrière-la-Chaux and Magglingen.\n\nOn 31 December 2009 District de la Neuveville, the municipality's former district, was dissolved. On the following day, 1 January 2010, it joined the newly created Arrondissement administratif Jura bernois. \n\nThe blazon of the municipal coat of arms is Azure a Chevron embowed between three Crosses Couped Argent and a Mount of 3 Coupeaux of the same. \n\nLamboing had a population (as of 2011) of 680. As of 2010 [update] , 5.8% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (2001-2011) the population has changed at a rate of 0.9%. Migration accounted for 0.4%, while births and deaths accounted for 0.4%. \n\nMost of the population (as of 2000 [update] ) speaks French (545 or 84.2%) as their first language, German is the second most common (80 or 12.4%) and Portuguese is the third (6 or 0.9%). There are 4 people who speak Italian and 2 people who speak Romansh . \n\nAs of 2008 [update] , the population was 49.7% male and 50.3% female. The population was made up of 320 Swiss men (47.5% of the population) and 15 (2.2%) non-Swiss men. There were 315 Swiss women (46.7%) and 24 (3.6%) non-Swiss women. Of the population in the municipality, 226 or about 34.9% were born in Lamboing and lived there in 2000. There were 208 or 32.1% who were born in the same canton, while 145 or 22.4% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 48 or 7.4% were born outside of Switzerland. \n\nAs of 2011 [update] , children and teenagers (0–19 years old) make up 21.6% of the population, while adults (20–64 years old) make up 60.4% and seniors (over 64 years old) make up 17.9%. \n\nAs of 2000 [update] , there were 260 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 327 married individuals, 34 widows or widowers and 26 individuals who are divorced. \n\nAs of 2010 [update] , there were 88 households that consist of only one person and 17 households with five or more people. In 2000 [update] , a total of 251 apartments (76.3% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 66 apartments (20.1%) were seasonally occupied and 12 apartments (3.6%) were empty. As of 2010 [update] , the construction rate of new housing units was 1.5 new units per 1000 residents. \n\nThe historical population is given in the following chart: \n\nIn the 2011 federal election the most popular party was the Social Democratic Party (SP) which received 26.4% of the vote. The next two most popular parties were the Swiss People's Party (SVP) (26.2%), and the FDP.The Liberals (15.5%) . In the federal election, a total of 193 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 37.0%. \n\nAs of 2011 [update] , Lamboing had an unemployment rate of 2.2%. As of 2008 [update] , there were a total of 109 people employed in the municipality. Of these, there were 31 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 12 businesses involved in this sector. 26 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 6 businesses in this sector. 52 people were employed in the tertiary sector , with 13 businesses in this sector. There were 335 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 43.3% of the workforce.\n\nIn 2008 [update] there were a total of 86 full-time equivalent jobs. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 21, of which 19 were in agriculture and 2 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 23 of which 9 or (39.1%) were in manufacturing and 14 (60.9%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 42. In the tertiary sector; 22 or 52.4% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 8 or 19.0% were in the movement and storage of goods, 6 or 14.3% were in a hotel or restaurant, and 3 or 7.1% were technical professionals or scientists. \n\nIn 2000 [update] , there were 42 workers who commuted into the municipality and 246 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 5.9 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. A total of 89 workers (67.9% of the 131 total workers in the municipality) both lived and worked in Lamboing. Of the working population, 4.8% used public transportation to get to work, and 71.9% used a private car. \n\nIn 2011 the average local and cantonal tax rate on a married resident of Lamboing making 150,000 CHF was 13.3%, while an unmarried resident's rate was 19.5%. For comparison, the average rate for the entire canton in 2006 was 13.9% and the nationwide rate was 11.6%. In 2009 there were a total of 294 tax payers in the municipality. Of that total, 93 made over 75 thousand CHF per year. There were 4 people who made between 15 and 20 thousand per year. The greatest number of workers, 99, made between 50 and 75 thousand CHF per year. The average income of the over 75,000 CHF group in Lamboing was 110,018 CHF, while the average across all of Switzerland was 130,478 CHF. \n\nFrom the 2000 census [update] , 394 or 60.9% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church , while 121 or 18.7% were Roman Catholic . Of the rest of the population, there were 2 members of an Orthodox church (or about 0.31% of the population), there was 1 individual who belongs to the Christian Catholic Church , and there were 18 individuals (or about 2.78% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 2 (or about 0.31% of the population) who were Islamic . 87 (or about 13.45% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist , and 31 individuals (or about 4.79% of the population) did not answer the question. \n\nIn Lamboing about 55.7% of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education , and 14.6% have completed additional higher education (either university or a Fachhochschule ). Of the 58 who had completed some form of tertiary schooling listed in the census, 69.0% were Swiss men, 22.4% were Swiss women. \n\nThe Canton of Bern school system provides one year of non-obligatory Kindergarten , followed by six years of Primary school. This is followed by three years of obligatory lower Secondary school where the students are separated according to ability and aptitude. Following the lower Secondary students may attend additional schooling or they may enter an apprenticeship . \n\nDuring the 2011-12 school year, there were a total of 62 students attending classes in Lamboing. There was one kindergarten class with a total of 24 students in the municipality. Of the kindergarten students, 4.2% were permanent or temporary residents of Switzerland (not citizens) and 4.2% have a different mother language than the classroom language. The municipality had 3 primary classes and 38 students. Of the primary students, 7.9% were permanent or temporary residents of Switzerland (not citizens) and 7.9% have a different mother language than the classroom language. \n\nAs of 2000 [update] , there were a total of 64 students attending any school in the municipality. Of those, 29 both lived and attended school in the municipality while 35 students came from another municipality. During the same year, 92 residents attended schools outside the municipality. ",
  "Bitter lemon is a bitter lemon flavoured soft drink . Its signature taste is a result of inherently bitter lemon pith being reinforced by the bitter alkaloid quinine .\n\nThe principal difference between tonic water and bitter lemon is the lemon juice, pith, and peel . The juice adds sour, offset by additional sweetener, and the oily peel fragrance.\n\nThe generic bitter lemon drink dates back to 1834. Schweppes introduced its brand of bitter lemon in 1957. \n\nBitter lemon is consumed both by itself and as a mixer , and is sold around the world. \n\nThis soft drink –related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Miami bass (also known as booty music or booty bass ) is a subgenre of hip hop music that became popular in the 1980s and 1990s. The use of drums from the Roland TR-808 , sustained kick drum , heavy bass, raised dance tempos, and frequently sexually explicit lyrical content differentiate it from other hip hop subgenres. Music author Richie Unterberger has characterized Miami bass as using rhythms with a \"stop-start flavor\" and \"hissy\" cymbals with lyrics that \"reflected the language of the streets, particularly Miami 's historically black neighborhoods such as Liberty City , Goulds , and Overtown \". \n\nDespite Miami bass never having consistent mainstream acceptance, early national media attention in the 1980s resulted in a profound impact on the development of hip hop , dance music , and pop . \n\nDuring the 1980s, the focus of Miami bass tended to be on DJs and record producers , rather than individual performers. Record labels such as Pandisc , HOT Records, 4-Sight Records and Skyywalker Records released much material of the genre. Unterberger has referred to James ( Maggotron ) McCauley (also known as DXJ, Maggozulu Too, Planet Detroit and Bass Master Khan) as the \"father of Miami bass\", a distinction McCauley denies, choosing to confer that status on producer Amos Larkins. \n\nDJ Kurtis Mantronik ( Mantronix ) was a key influence on Miami bass. In particular, Mantronik's single \"Bass Machine\" (1986), featuring rap vocals by T La Rock , was pivotal to the development of Miami bass. \n\nMC ADE 's \"Bass Rock Express\", with music and beats produced by Amos Larkins, is often credited as being the first Miami bass record to gain underground popularity on an international scale. \n\nThe single \"Throw The D\" by the group 2 Live Crew in 1986 gave a permanent blueprint to how future Miami bass songs were written and produced. \n\n2 Live Crew ( Christopher Wong \"Fresh Kid Ice\" Won , Luther \"Luke Skyywalker\" Campbell and David \"Mr. Mixx\" Hobbs) played a key role in popularizing Miami bass in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The group's 1986 release, The 2 Live Crew Is What We Are , became controversial for its sexually explicit lyrics. 1989's As Nasty As They Wanna Be , along with its hit single \" Me So Horny \", proved more controversial still, leading to legal troubles for both 2 Live Crew and retailers selling the album. All charges were eventually overturned on appeal. \n\nFor the better part of the mid 1980s and early 1990s, DJs such as Luke Skyywalker's Ghetto Style DJs, Norberto Morales' Triple M DJs, Super JD's MHF DJs, Space Funk DJs, Mohamed Moretta, DJ Nice & Nasty , Felix Sama, DJ Spin, Ramon Hernandez, Bass Master DJs, DJ Laz , Earl \"The Pearl\" Little, Uncle Al, Ser MC, Raylo & Dem Damn Dogs, DJ Slice, K-Bass, Jam Pony Express and others were heavily involved in playing Miami bass at local outdoor events to large audiences at area beaches, parks, and fairs.\n\nClubs in South Florida, including Pac-Jam , Superstars Rollertheque, Bass Station, Studio 183, Randolphs, Nepenthe, Video Powerhouse, Skylight Express, Beat Club and Club Boca, were hosting bass nights on a regular basis. Miami radio airplay and programming support was strong in the now defunct Rhythm 98, as well as WEDR and WPOW (Power 96).\n\nContribution and promotion of Miami bass also came out of Orlando . 102 Jamz ( WJHM ), a prominent Orlando radio station in the late 1980s, featured Miami bass and helped its popularity rise in and around Central Florida.\n\nFlorida breaks was heavily influenced by Miami bass in addition to elements of house , and deep bass that eventually created \"The Orlando Sound\". Thus, Miami bass quickly became a Florida staple.\n\nBy the mid-1990s, the influence of Miami bass had spread outside South and Central Florida to all areas of Florida and the Southern United States. In the mid-1990s, it saw a commercial and mainstream resurgence, with Miami bass influenced artists such as L'Trimm , 95 South , Tag Team , 69 Boyz , Quad City DJ's and Freak Nasty all scoring big Miami bass hits. Examples of these songs are \" Whoomp! (There It Is) \" by Tag Team in 1993, \" Tootsee Roll \" by 69 Boyz in 1994, \" C'mon N' Ride It (The Train) \" by the Quad City DJ's in 1996 and \" Whoot, There It Is \" by 95 South in 1993. \n\nThese songs all reached the top 20 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and exposed Miami bass nationally. These artists generally used a Miami bass sound and production but did it in a far less explicit and far more accessible way than had been previously done by Campbell and the 2 Live Crew . \n\nMiami bass is closely related to the electronic dance music genres of ghettotech and booty house , genres which combine Detroit techno and Chicago house with the Miami bass sound. Ghettotech follows the same sexually oriented lyrics, hip-hop bass lines and streetwise attitude, but with harder, uptempo Roland TR-909 techno-style kick beats. In 2007, contemporary hip-hop and R&B songs became more dance oriented, showing influences of Miami bass and techno, and are typically sped up to a \"chipmunk\" sound for faster tempos for dances such as juking, wu-tanging and bopping, usually only done in Miami-Dade, Broward and Palm Beach Counties in south Florida. [ citation needed ]\n\nMiami bass has been influenced by the cultural history of its wide-ranging community with the evolution of Cuban , Dominican , and Afro-Brazilian -fused sub-genres that include Baltimore club and funk carioca . \n\nAnother subgenre of Miami bass is \"car audio bass\", which features an even more stripped down bass-heavy sound, tending to focus on either extremely hard 909 kicks combined with sine waves or the classic 808 kick , or sometimes simply the sine wave by itself. [ citation needed ] Some artist examples would be DJ Laz , DJ Magic Mike , Afro-Rican (as Power Supply), Techmaster P.E.B. , DJ Billy E, Bass 305 and Bass Patrol.\n\nGqom, an African electronic dance genre that originated in Durban , South Africa, in the early 2010s, is sometimes conflated with Miami bass due to perceived similarities between Durban's cityscape and Miami's South and North Beach areas as well as car culture, with enhanced car sound systems , with an emphasis on bass . However, gqom and miami bass are distinct in their origins and their production styles. ",
  "Neophrynichthys marcidus McCulloch, 1926\n\nPsychrolutes marcidus , the smooth-head blobfish , also known simply as blobfish , is a deep-sea fish of the family Psychrolutidae . It inhabits the deep waters off the coasts of mainland Australia and Tasmania , as well as the waters of New Zealand . \n\nBlobfish are typically shorter than 30 cm (12 in). They live at depths between 600 and 1,200 m (2,000 and 3,900 ft), where the pressure is 60 to 120 times greater than that at sea level , which would likely make gas bladders inefficient for maintaining buoyancy . Instead, the flesh of the blobfish is primarily a gelatinous mass with a density slightly less than that of water; this allows the fish to float above the sea floor without expending energy on swimming. The blobfish has a relative lack of muscle , but this is not a disadvantage, as its main food source is edible matter that floats in front of it, such as deep-ocean crustaceans . \n\nThis fish-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "A singer-songwriter is a musician who writes , composes , and performs their own musical material, including lyrics and melodies . In the United States, the category is built on the folk - acoustic tradition with a guitar , although this role has transmuted through different eras of popular music . Traditionally, these musicians would write and sing songs personal to them. Singer-songwriters often provide the sole musical accompaniment to an entire song. The piano is also an instrument of choice.\n\nThe label \"singer-songwriter\" (or \"song-writer/singer\" ) is used by record labels and critics to define popular music artists who write and perform their own material, which is often self-accompanied – generally on acoustic guitar or piano. Such an artist performs the roles of composer , lyricist , vocalist, sometimes instrumentalist, and often self-manager. According to AllMusic , singer-songwriters' lyrics are often personal but veiled by elaborate metaphors and vague imagery, and their creative concern is to place emphasis on the song rather than on their performance of it. Most records by such artists have a similarly straightforward and spare sound that places emphasis on the song itself. \n\nThe term may also characterise songwriters in the rock , folk , country , and pop-music genres – including Henry Russell (1812–1900), Aristide Bruant (1851–1925), Hank Williams (1923–1953), and Buddy Holly (1936–1959). The phrase \"singer-songwriter\", recorded from 1949, came into popular usage from the 1960s onwards to describe songwriters who followed particular stylistic and thematic conventions, particularly lyrical introspection, confessional songwriting, mild musical arrangements, and an understated performing style. According to writer Larry David Smith, because it merged the roles of composer, writer, and singer, the popularity of the singer-songwriter phenomenon reintroduced the Medieval troubadour tradition of \"songs with public personalities\" after the Tin Pan Alley era in American popular music. Song topics of singer-songwriters from the American folk music revival include political protest , as in the case of Woody Guthrie (1912–1967) and Pete Seeger (1919–2014). According to the\n\nJournal of Popular Music Studies , from the folk revival and onward into its permanence in pop music, the role of a singer-songwriter has involved several dimensions of creative identity:\n\nThe first aesthetic layer encourages songwriters to sing and perform their own works and to instill their own stylistic flavors into the song texts. The songwriters are not independent from the works once they are finished; rather, they enter into, activate, and authenticate the song texts through their vocal and musical performances. While the first layer does not always require the singer to be the songwriter, the second sociological layer not only fixates on the relationship between singer and songwriter (in this case, singer-songwriter is often hyphenated instead of using a slash between singer and songwriter), but also solicits more sociological agency aside from singing and songwriting, such as arranging, mixing, producing, collaborating, and media management. In other words, a singer-songwriter thus undergoes a thickening process involving two-layered voices, including performing stylistic persona, amassing other voices, and coordinating other sociological skills. This thickening process demonstrates the fluid, multiple, and heterogeneous voices underneath the singular authorial image, thus complicating the notion of authorship for singer-songwriters. \n\nThe concept of a singer-songwriter can be traced to ancient bardic oral tradition, which has existed in various forms throughout the world. Poems would be performed as chant or song, sometimes accompanied by a harp or other similar instrument. After the invention of printing, songs would be written and performed by ballad sellers. Usually these would be versions of existing tunes and lyrics, which were constantly evolving. This developed into the singer-songwriting traditions of folk culture.\n\nTraveling performers existed throughout Europe. Thus, the folklorist Anatole Le Braz gives a detailed account of one ballad singer, Yann Ar Minouz, who wrote and performed songs traveling through Brittany in the late nineteenth century and selling printed versions. \n\nIn large towns it was possible to make a living performing in public venues, and with the invention of phonographic recording, early singer-songwriters like Théodore Botrel , George M. Cohan , and Hank Williams became celebrities; radio further added to their public recognition and appeal.\n\nDuring the period from the 1940s through the 1960s, sparked by the American folk music revival , young performers inspired by traditional folk music and groups like the Almanac Singers and the Weavers began writing and performing their own original material and creating their own musical arrangements. \n\nIn the early 21st century, the digital audio workstation GarageBand has been utilized by many aspiring singer-songwriters to compose and record music. Singer-songwriters who have composed music professionally with GarageBand include Erykah Badu (for her 2008 album New Amerykah Part One ) and Bilal (for his 2010 album Airtight's Revenge ). \n\nThe term \"singer-songwriter\" in North America can be traced back to singers who developed works in the blues and folk music style. Early to mid-20th century American singer-songwriters include Lead Belly , Jimmie Rodgers , Blind Lemon Jefferson , T-Bone Walker , Blind Willie McTell , Lightnin' Hopkins , Son House , and Robert Johnson . In the 1940s and 1950s country singer-songwriters like Hank Williams became well known, as well as Woody Guthrie , and Pete Seeger , along with Ronnie Gilbert and Lee Hays and other members of the Weavers who performed their mostly topical works to an ever-growing wider audience. These proto-singer-songwriters were less concerned than today's singer-songwriters with the unadulterated originality of their music and lyrics, and would lift parts from other songs and play covers without hesitation. The tradition of writing topical songs (songs regarding specific issues of the day, such as Lead Belly's \"Jim Crow Blues\" or Guthrie's \" Deportee (Plane Wreck at Los Gatos) \") was established by this group of musicians. Singers like Seeger and Guthrie would attend rallies for labor unions, and so wrote many songs concerning the life of the working classes, and social protest; as did other folksingers like Josh White , Cisco Houston , Malvina Reynolds , Earl Robinson , Ewan MacColl , John Jacob Niles , and Doc Watson , while blues singers like Johnson and Hopkins wrote songs about their personal life experiences. This focus on social issues has greatly influenced the singer-songwriter genre. Additionally in the 1930s through the 1950s several jazz and blues singer-songwriters emerged like Hoagy Carmichael , Billie Holiday , Ray Charles , Harry Gibson , Peggy Lee , and Nina Simone , as well as in the rock n' roll genre from which emerged influential singer-songwriters Jerry Lee Lewis , Buddy Holly , Chuck Berry , Roy Orbison , Sam Cooke , Ritchie Valens , and Paul Anka . In the country music field, singer-songwriters like Hank Williams , Patsy Cline , Tammy Wynette , Loretta Lynn , George Jones , Merle Haggard , Roger Miller , Billy Edd Wheeler , and others emerged from the 1940s through the 1960s, often writing compelling songs about love relationships and other subjects.\n\nThe first popular recognition of the singer-songwriter in English-speaking North America and the United Kingdom occurred in the 1960s and early 1970s when a series of blues, folk and country -influenced musicians rose to prominence and popularity. These singer-songwriters included Bob Dylan , Neil Young , John Lennon , Van Morrison , Willie Nelson , Paul Simon , Leonard Cohen , Albert Hammond , Gordon Lightfoot , and Joni Mitchell . Artists who had been primarily songwriters, notably Carole King , Townes Van Zandt , and Neil Diamond , also began releasing work as performers. In contrast to the storytelling approach of most prior country and folk music, these performers typically wrote songs from a highly personal (often first-person), introspective point of view. The adjectives \"confessional\" and \"sensitive\" were often used (sometimes derisively) to describe singer-songwriter style.\n\nIn the rock band era, members were not technically singer-songwriters as solo acts. However, many were singer-songwriters who created songs with other band members. Examples include Paul McCartney , John Lennon , George Harrison , Ringo Starr , Brian Wilson , Mick Jagger , Keith Richards , Jerry Garcia and Bob Weir , Elton John (with Bernie Taupin ), Justin Hayward , John Lodge , Robbie Robertson , Ian Anderson , Phil Collins , Peter Gabriel , Peter Frampton , Don Henley , Glenn Frey , Country Joe McDonald , and Barry Melton . Many others like Eric Clapton found success as singer-songwriters in their later careers.\n\nThe scene that had developed out of the American folk music revival , pioneered by Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger had grown to a major movement in the early 1960s, popularized by Joan Baez and her protégée, Bob Dylan , who had started reaching a mainstream audience with his hit, Blowin' in the Wind \" (1963) bringing \" protest songs \" to a wider audience. There were hints of cross-pollination, but rock and folk music had remained largely separate genres, often with different audiences. An early attempt at fusing elements of folk and rock was highlighted in the Animals \" House of the Rising Sun \" (1964), a folk song, recorded with rock and roll instrumentation. \n\nBy the mid-1960s Bob Dylan took the lead in merging folk and rock, and in July 1965, released \" Like a Rolling Stone \", with a revolutionary rock sound, steeped in tawdry urban imagery, followed by an electric performance later that month at the Newport Folk Festival. Dylan plugged an entire generation into the milieu of the singer-songwriter. Often writing from an urban point of view, with poetry punctuated by rock rhythms and electric power, Dylan's fusing of folk and rock freed up emerging singer-songwriters to use elements of both traditions to tell their stories. In the mid- to late 1960s, bands and singer-songwriters began to proliferate the underground New York art/music scene. The release of The Velvet Underground & Nico in 1967, featuring singer-songwriter Lou Reed and German singer and collaborator Nico was described as the \"most prophetic rock album ever made\" by Rolling Stone in 2003. \n\nIn the late '60s a new wave of female singer-songwriters broke from the confines of pop, using the urban landscape as their canvas for lyrics in the confessional style of poets like Anne Sexton and Sylvia Plath . These pioneering women, appeared in a feature in Newsweek , July 1969, \"The Girls: Letting Go: 'What is common to them – to Joni Mitchell and Lotti Golden , to Laura Nyro , Melanie , and to Elyse Weinberg , are the personalised songs they write, like voyages of self-discovery, brimming with keen observation and startling in the impact of their poetry.\" In The Guardian , author Laura Barton describes the radical shift in subject matter—they sang about politics, love affairs, the urban landscape, drugs, disappointment, and the life and loneliness of the itinerant performer. Lotti Golden , in her Atlantic debut album Motor-Cycle , chronicled her life in NYC's East Village in the late 1960s counterculture, visiting subjects such as gender identity (The Space Queens-Silky is Sad) and excessive drug use (Gonna Fay's). The women in the 1969 Newsweek article ushered in a new age of the contemporary female singer-songwriter that has informed generations of women singer-songwriters into the 21st century, with poet Warsan Shire as the muse for Beyoncé 's 2016 album Lemonade . \n\nBy the mid-1970s and early 1980s, the original wave of singer-songwriters had largely been absorbed into a more general pop or soft rock format, but some new artists in the singer-songwriter tradition (including Billy Joel , Stevie Wonder , Gilbert O'Sullivan , Bruce Springsteen , Tom Petty , Jackson Browne , Chris Isaak , Victoria Williams , John Mellencamp , and Warren Zevon ) continued to emerge, and in other cases rock and even punk rock artists such as Peter Case , Paul Collins , and Paul Westerberg transitioned to careers as solo singer-songwriters. Kate Bush remained distinctive throughout with her idiosyncratic style.\n\nIn the late 1980s, the term was applied to a group of predominantly female U.S. artists, beginning with Suzanne Vega whose first album sold unexpectedly well, followed by the likes of Tracy Chapman , Melissa Etheridge , Nanci Griffith , k.d. lang , Mariah Carey , Shania Twain , Sarah McLachlan , Shawn Colvin , Sheryl Crow , Lisa Loeb , Joan Osborne , Indigo Girls , and Tori Amos , who found success first in the United Kingdom, then in her home market. In the early 1990s, female artists also began to emerge in new styles, including Courtney Love and PJ Harvey . Later in the mid-1990s, the term was revived again with the success of Canada's Alanis Morissette and her breakthrough album Jagged Little Pill .\n\nAlso in the 1980s and 1990s, artists such as Bono , the Edge , Dave Matthews , Jeff Buckley , Richard Barone , Duncan Sheik , and Elliott Smith borrowed from the singer-songwriter tradition to create new acoustic-based rock styles. In the 2000s, a quieter style emerged, with largely impressionistic lyrics, from artists such as Norah Jones , Conor Oberst , Sufjan Stevens , David Bazan , South San Gabriel , Iron & Wine , David Gray , Ray LaMontagne , Meg Hutchinson , Darden Smith , Josh Rouse , Steve Millar, Jolie Holland , Patrick Duff , Richard Buckner , Jewel , Jack Savoretti , Richard Shindell , John Gorka , and Antje Duvekot . Some started to branch out in new genres such as Kurt Cobain , Noel Gallagher , T Bone Burnett , Eddie Vedder , and Pete Yorn . Others used drugs as a mind-altering way to boost creativity; for example, Emil Amos of Holy Sons took drugs daily from age sixteen on, wrote over 1,000 songs, and landed a record contract with an indie label . \n\nRecording on the professional-grade systems became affordable for individuals in the late 1990s. This created opportunities for people to independently record and sell their music. Such artists are known as \"indies\" because they release their records on independent, often self-owned record labels, or no label at all. Additionally the Internet has provided a means for indies to get their music heard by a wider audience.\n\nFrench \" chanson \" comes from an old tradition, since the Middle Ages . It is driven by the rhythms of the French language. It can be distinguished from the rest of French \"pop\" music or soft rock format that began to spread in France during the 1960s until today, under the cultural influence of Anglo-American rock music and the rock band era.\n\nThe first modern French singer-songwriter was Charles Trenet , who began his solo career in 1938. He was the first to use jazz rhythms in chanson. He would remain an isolated act until the creative blooming of a new generation during the post-World War II era (mid-1940s and 1950s), where such artists as Léo Ferré , Georges Brassens , Félix Leclerc (from Quebec ), Serge Gainsbourg , Jacques Brel (from Belgium), Henri Salvador (from French Guiana), Charles Aznavour , and Barbara appeared, with contrasted and rich imagination. Most of them are recognized as great masters by younger generations of French artists, especially Ferré (for the richness of his lyrics, his melodic genius, his critical density on social issues and his body of work's profoundness) and Gainsbourg (for the bright and tasteful adaptation of pop or rock music with French language-driven rhythms).\n\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, prominent singer-songwriters included Claude Nougaro , Jean Ferrat , Boby Lapointe , Françoise Hardy , Frédérik Mey , Michel Polnareff , Nino Ferrer , Christophe , Bernard Lavilliers , Véronique Sanson and Jacques Higelin , amongst others.\n\nCantautori (Italian plural; the singular is cantautore ) is the Italian expression corresponding to singer-songwriters in English. The word is a portmanteau of cantante (singer) and autore (writer).\n\nThe first internationally renowned cantautore was Domenico Modugno with his song \" Volare (Nel blu dipinto di blu) \", a huge best seller in 1958; other early cantautori , who began their careers in the late 50s, are Gino Paoli , Luigi Tenco , Umberto Bindi , Giorgio Gaber , and Enzo Jannacci .\n\nFabrizio De André , Lucio Battisti , and Francesco Guccini began their careers in the '60s, while Edoardo Bennato , Lucio Dalla , Francesco De Gregori , Franco Battiato , Rino Gaetano , Ivan Graziani , Ivano Fossati , Antonello Venditti , Claudio Baglioni , Pino Daniele , Roberto Vecchioni , Paolo Conte , Angelo Branduardi , and Eugenio Finardi all appeared in the '70s.\nTheir songs are still popular today, often telling stories of marginalized (De André, Guccini, Dalla) and rebellious people (Finardi, De Gregori, Venditti), or having a political background (Venditti, Guccini).\n\nBranduardi was greatly influenced by Medieval and Baroque musical styles, while his lyrics are usually inspired by ancient fables. Battiato started as a progressive rock and cultivated music artist in the 1970s, shifting to an original blend of pop, electronic, new wave, and world music in the 1980s.\n\nThose cantautori linked to the city of Genoa (De André, Paoli, Bindi, Tenco, Baccini, etc.) are also referred as members of the Genoese School .\n\nThe Neapolitan cantautore Pino Daniele often fused genres as diverse as R&B, fusion, blues, pop, jazz, and tarantella to produce a sound uniquely his own, with lyrics variously in Italian, Neapolitan or English. Similarly Paolo Conte was often tagged as a cantautore , but was more into the jazz tradition.\n\nIn the 1980s Vasco Rossi was renowned for his blend of blues-tinged rock music mixed with Italian melodies.\nHe was nicknamed \"the only Italian rockstar\" ( l'unica rockstar italiana ) by his fans. \n\nMixing international sounds and Italian lyrics, in the 2000s Bugo became the \" fantautore \", a neologism coined for him. Despite not having achieved great fame, he is considered the pioneer of the renewal of Italian songwriting, making a point to break from the politicised content of the 70s. \n\nIn the last 25 years the tradition has mainly been continued by Samuele Bersani , Caparezza , and the so-called \"2nd Roman school of cantautori \" (including Max Gazzè , Niccolò Fabi , Daniele Silvestri , and Simone Cristicchi ).\n\nThe word has been borrowed into other languages, including Spanish, Portuguese, and Catalan cantautor , French chantauteur , Maltese kantawtur , Romanian cantautor , and Slovenian kantavtor .\n\nBeginning in the 1960s and following the Italian cantautori style of the 1950s (like the one of Domenico Modugno), many Latin American countries developed singer-songwriter traditions that adopted elements from various popular styles. The first such tradition was the mid-1960s invention of nueva canción , which took hold in Andean countries like Chile, Peru, Argentina and Bolivia.\n\nAt around the same time, the Brazilian popular style bossa nova was evolving into a politically charged singer-songwriter tradition called Tropicalismo . Two performers, Gilberto Gil and Caetano Veloso became two of the most famous people in all of Brazil through their work in Tropicalismo.\n\nAfter World War II it was developed in Italy a very prolific singer-songwriter (in Italian cantautore ) tradition, initially connected with the French school of the chansonniers , and lately developed very heterogeneously. Although the term cantautore normally implies consistent sociopolitical content in lyrics, noteworthy performers in a more inclusive singer-songwriter categorization are: Domenico Modugno , Luigi Tenco , Gino Paoli , Sergio Endrigo , Fabrizio De André , Francesco De Gregori , Antonello Venditti , Roberto Vecchioni , Ivano Fossati , Lucio Dalla , Francesco Guccini , and Franco Battiato .\n\nIn neighbouring Malta, the main singer-songwriters are Walter Micallef , Manwel Mifsud and Vince Fabri. They all perform in Maltese.\n\nSpain and Portugal have also had singer-songwriter traditions, which are sometimes said to have drawn on Latin elements. Catalonia is known for the Nova Cançó tradition – exemplified by Joan Manuel Serrat and Lluís Llach ; the Portuguese folk/protest singer and songwriter José Afonso helped lead a revival of Portuguese folk culture, including a modernized, more socially aware form of fado called nova canção. Following Portugal's Carnation Revolution of 1974, nova canção became more politicized and was known as canto livre. Another important Spain singer-songwriters are Joaquín Sabina , José Luis Perales , and Luis Eduardo Aute .\n\nIn the latter part of the 1960s and into the 1970s, socially and politically aware singer-songwriters like Silvio Rodríguez and Pablo Milanés emerged in Cuba, birthing a genre known as nueva trova . Trova as a genre has had broad influence across Latin America. In Mexico, for example, canción yucateca on the Yucatán Peninsula and trova serrana in the Sierra Juárez, Oaxaca , are both regional adaptations of trova. Today, Guatemalan Ricardo Arjona qualifies as Latin America's most commercially successful singer-songwriter. Although sociopolitical engagement is uneven in his oeuvre, some see Arjona's more engaged works as placing him in the tradition of the Italian cantautori .\n\nIn the mid-1970s, a singer-songwriter tradition called canto popular emerged in Uruguay.\n\nWith the influence of Tropicalismo , Traditional Samba and Bossa Nova , MPB ( Música popular brasileira ), or Brazilian Popular Music, became highly singer-songwriter based. For years solo artists would dominate Brazilian popular music with romantic cynicism alla Jobim or subliminal anti-government messages alla Chico Buarque . After the end of the military dictatorship in Brazil , Brazilian music became less politically and socially conscious. The censored Raul Seixas or the humorous spiritualist Jorge Ben were slowly obscured by funk carioca , axé music , and Brazilian disco . In recent years, however, a new stock of socially conscious Brazilian singer-songwriters is beginning to break the almost strictly dance-music momentum that has reigned since the 1980s (see the 'Brazilian folk/folk-rock sub-article in Brazilian Music ).\n\nSince the 1960s, those singers who wrote songs outside the Soviet establishment have been known as \"bards\". The first songs traditionally referred to as bard songs are thought to be written in the late 1930s and early 1940s, and the very existence of the genre is traditionally originated from the amateur activities of the Soviet intelligentsia, namely mass backpacking movement and the students' song movement of the 1950s and 1960s. Many bards performed their songs in small groups of people using a Russian guitar , rarely if ever would they be accompanied by other musicians or singers. Though, bards using piano or accordion are also known. Those who became popular held modest concerts. The first nationwide-famous bards (starting their career in the 1950s) are traditionally referred to as the First Five: Mikhail Ancharov, Alexander Gorodnitsky , Novella Matveyeva , Bulat Okudzhava , and Yuri Vizbor . In the 1960s, they were joined by Vladimir Vysotsky , Victor Berkovsky , Yuliy Kim , and many others.\n\nIn the course of the 1970s, the shift to the classical 6-string guitar took place, and now, a Russian guitar is a rare bird with the bards. In the same period, the movement of KSP (Kluby Samodeyatelnoy Pesni – amateur song fan clubs) emerged, providing the bards with highly educated audience, and up to the end of the 1980s being their key promotion engine. Bards were rarely permitted to record their music, partly given the political nature of many songs, partly due to their vague status in the strictly organised state-supported show business establishment of the USSR. As a result, bard tunes usually made their way around as folk lore, from mouth to mouth, or via the copying of amateur recordings (sometimes referred as magnitizdat ) made at concerts, particularly those songs that were of political nature. Bard poetry differs from other poetry mainly in the fact that it is sung along with a simple guitar melody as opposed to being spoken. Another difference is that this form of poetry focuses less on style and more on meaning. This means that fewer stylistic devices are used, and the poetry often takes the form of narrative. What separates bard poetry from other songs is the fact that the music is far less important than the lyrics; chord progressions are often very simple and tend to repeat from one bard song to another. On the other hand, in the USSR the chief bard supporter was the state Union of Composers, and the main bard hater was the state Union of Writers. A far more obvious difference was the commerce-free nature of the genre: songs were written to be sung and not to be sold. The similar genre dominated by singers-songwriters is known as sung poetry in other Post-Soviet countries.\n\nSinger-songwriters are popular in Bulgaria under the name \"bards\", or \"poets with guitars\". Their tradition is a mixture of traditional folk motifs, city folklore from the early 20th century, and modern influences. In the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, the Communist regime in the country started to tolerate the Bulgarian \"bards\", promoting the so-called \"political songs\", performed usually by one-man bands. A national festival tradition was established, under the title \"Alen Mak\" (Red Poppy), a symbol with strong Communist meaning in Bulgaria. At the same time, there were some prominent underground figures which were against the official Communist Party line, such as Angel \"Jendema\" Angelov, Yavor \"Yavkata\" Rilov, and Velizar \"Valdes\" Vankov.\n\nAfter the collapse of Communism in 1989, the singer-songwriters' tradition was re-established. Currently, the Bulgarian \"bards\" enjoy several festivals (local and international) per year, namely the PoKi Festival (Poets with Guitars, Poetic Strings) in the town of Harmanli, the Bardfest in Lovech, the Sofia Evenings of Singer-Songwriters, and others. Major figures in the Bulgarian tradition are Dimitar Taralezhkov, Angel \"Jendema\" Angelov, Yavor \"Yavkata\" Rilov, Velizar \"Valdes\" Vankov, Dimitar Dobrev, Andro Stubel, Branimir \"Bunny\" Stoykov, Dorothea Tabakova, Mihail Belchev, Assen Maslarski, Grisha Trifonov, Plamen Stavrev, Vladimir Levkov, Margarita Drumeva, Maria Batchvarova, Plamen Sivov, and Krasimir Parvanov. [ citation needed ]\n\nDespite the communist isolation, the tradition of the singer-songwriter in Romania flourished beginning with the end of the 1960s and it was put in the context of folk music , with its three main styles in Romania: ethno folk, American-style folk and lyrical (cult) folk. The framework for many of these initiatives came under the form of Cenaclul Flacăra , a series of mass cultural events with an inevitable ideological touch. Still, with the merit of supporting great opening initiatives: the appropriation of Western artists like Bob Dylan , Joan Baez and others from the Woodstock generation, the public performance of gospel-like music, the opening to big international issues (pop culture, accountability of the leadership, tension surging during the Cold War-with surprisingly neutral positions, etc.).\nOverall, the Romanian folk, in general, could be marked as an underground cultural movement, somewhere between non-aligned and protest music. [ citation needed ]\n\nRooted in the European Bänkelsang (\"bench-singing\") and Moritat traditions while also taking immediate inspiration from the French chanson scene and the American folk music revival , the 1960s and 1970s saw the emergence of a whole generation of German-language singer-songwriters called Liedermacher (\"songmakers\"), among them Hannes Wader , Franz Josef Degenhardt , Reinhard Mey , and Konstantin Wecker from West Germany, Wolf Biermann from East Germany as well as Ludwig Hirsch and Georg Danzer from Austria. With regards to content and style, the Liedermacher spectrum ranges from political balladeering to rather observational storytelling and love songs. The lyrics often deal with topics such as social injustice , militarism , consumerism , environmental issues or the repercussions of the German Nazi past , often expressing technoskepticism and anti-establishment views. \n\nIn the mid-1960s, Sweden witnessed the renaissance of the \"trubadur\", the Swedish version of the singer-songwriter. Cornelis Vreeswijk and Fred Åkerström were particularly influential in their efforts to blend the heritage of the \" visa \" (a specific way to render simple stanzaic poems or songs, given distinction by artists such as Carl Michael Bellman and Evert Taube ) with modern approaches to balladeering. \n\nEde Staal ( Warffum ) (1941–1986) was a Dutch singer-songwriter from the Northern province of Groningen who sang mainly in the Groninger dialect of Dutch.",
  "Croatian national costume , also called as Croatian traditional clothing or Croatian dress ( Croatian : hrvatska narodna nošnja , plural: hrvatske narodne nošnje ), refers to the traditional clothing worn by Croats living in Croatia , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia , with smaller communities in Hungary , Austria , Montenegro , and Romania . Since today Croats wear Western-style clothing on a daily basis, the national costumes are most often worn with connection to special events and celebrations, mostly at ethnic festivals, religious holidays, weddings, and by dancing groups who dance the traditional Croatian kolo , or circle dance.\n\nEach cultural and geographical region has its own specific variety of costume that vary in style, material, color, shape, and form. Much of these regional costumes were influenced by the Austrian , Hungarian , German , Italian , or Ottoman presence, due to whichever power ruled the region. \n\nFor the female dress, attire consists of a plain white dress or blouse ( košulja ) or underskirt ( skutići ), which is usually the basic form of the costume. It is then added with other clothing and decorations, which may include another overdress or skirt ( kotula ), a decorative jacket ( djaketa , paletun or koret ), apron ( ogrnjač or pregjača ), scarf ( ubrsac ), kerchief or shawl which are usually decorated with a floral or animal motif. The embroidery is very intricate and is usually red, white, blue, gold, or black. Her jewellery, ranging from necklaces, earrings, bracelets, and rings could consist of gold , silver , beads, pearls , or even coral from the Adriatic . Hair is interwoven into one or two braids and decorated with red ribbons for girls or women that are unmarried, while married women wear woven or silk kerchiefs on their heads. Costumes of brides consists of a crown or wreath often made of flowers ( vijenac ) and large amounts of jewelry. The woman's head could be adorned by a kerchief, cap, or a headdress, the most famous being the headdresses worn by the women from the island of Pag . The amount of paraphernalia a woman is adorned with, either very much or rarely any at all, depends on the region. Completing the costume are stockings ( bječve ) or knee-high socks, and boots or a special kind of sandal called opanci . \n\nFor the males, the national dress usually consists on loose, wide slacks (gaće / širkoke) and a shirt, and both are usually either black or white, or both. The man may wear a decorative or plain vest ( fermen or jačerma ), over his shirt, and possibly a waistcoat . The man almost always wears a cap, varying in shape and design depending on the region. The most famous cap is perhaps the Lika cap , worn in the Lika region for centuries by the people. Footwear, like the women's, consists mainly on boots and sandals. Because of the weather, certain places often have woolen vests, cloaks, coats, or fur for the colder regions, and silk and light linens for the warmer climates. \n\nThere are four main types of costumes associated with the regions: the Pannonian style in the north and east, the continental or Dinaric style, and the coastal style on the coast. \n\nBoth Slavonia and Baranya are located in the east, and are associated with the Pannonian style of dress and the Šokci . In Slavonia, the costumes tend to be very elaborate, with floral designs and clothing with silk or wool, fancy embroidery, decorative silk ribbons and bows, lace work, gold or silver jewelry, corals, amber necklaces and pearls for the women. The colors of the dresses tend to be bright and numerous, with colors ranging from gold, red, blue, white, and black all in one costume. The top shirt, or odnjica , of the costume has fringed-wing sleeves, which is generally associated with the Pannonian style.\n\nFor the men, they tend to wear not as many colors for the shirt and pants, but often wear thick coats or vests with designs and patterns stitched on and fancy embroidery like the women. Their sleeves might have a slight ruffle at the end, but not as much as the women's. In Baranya, a part of the men's costume is a small apron that is worn over the trousers that ranges in color and design.\n\nPosavina and Podravina are both in the north, north-east part of Croatia. Unlike the Slavonians, the costumes from Posavina do not focus on too much elaborate designs and patterns, and instead consists of simple black and white blouses, trousers, and skirts. The men wear black vests and black hats while the women wear beautiful silk shawls, usually blue or red in color with flower motifs. A thick apron with embroidered designs could be worn as well, and their color and detailed patterns are often the main focus of the costume.\n\nAlthough the clothing may be plain, the shawls and/or aprons worn over the blouses and skirts make up for the plain attire in Podravina , and they are sometimes so colorful and richly garnished with patterns that they completely cover up the main dress. The women in Podravina style their own kerchiefs with a unique embroidery from the region, and they wear aprons over their dresses which are colorful and geometric in design and attached with a multi-colored fringe. The men's vests are usually red or black and color and are garnished with intricate patterns and embroidery as well.\n\nMeđimurje , Zagorje and Zagreb are all located in the north, and are therefore influenced by the continental style. White garments are typical for the continental region, but each has its own decorative scarves, shawls, aprons, and jewellery. Red is the most popular color, especially in Zagorje, and the aprons and vests worn by the men and women are red with elaborate stitching and embroidery, mostly with gold thread. Women wear colorful shawls and kerchiefs which are usually red with flower designs. The second most popular color is black, which could have gold or white embroidery, or none at all. \n\nVery often, the men and women would not wear any aprons or shawls, and their costumes would mostly consist of their white garments, which they may stitch a border of color at the ends, or add a sash ( tkanica ) for some color.\n\nHats are an important part of a male's costume, and can come in two forms: the traditional Pannonian hat ( škrlak ) is black and dome-shaped, with a red wool band embroidered with multi-colored thread and white and gold dots attached, or the black felt box-hat ( šešir ) folded into a flat bow at the back with a grosgrain ribbon tied around the body. Over the grosgrain ribbon, red, white and blue strings are often tied around the hat (e.g. the Croatian tri-color).\n\nThe costumes from Istria are influenced by the Adriatic style of the coast.\n\nThe men's costumes are typically blue or brown or white, and consist of white, ankle length trousers that are tighter than the Slavonian style, shirts, and leather vests. Coats worn over them are generally short and long-sleeved or long, sleeveless ones. Accessories include wide silk belts, red or black caps, and cotton socks worn over their footwear called opanci (strapped soft soled sandals).\n\nWomen on the coast wear broad-sleeved white blouses that are embroidered in silk or lace, as well as pleated skirts or dresses varying in color, and stockings under their opanci . They also cover their shoulders with colorful shawls called oplece , which cover the shoulders and tie around the neck, hanging over their arms and upper-chest. Jewellery is made of colorful glass beads and silver coin discs, which are found hanging around the neck and waist by string of leather. \n\nThe costumes of Lika show testament to both the Dinaric and Ottoman influence of the region. Due to the military history of the region, costumes can vary from civilian to military-wear. Because of the ruralness of the region and the prevalence of sheep, wool is spun and dyed (usually red, black, yellow and green) and fur coats and capes are common because of the cold winter weather.\n\nWomen tend to wear skirts down to their ankles and a white blouse. Their attire is generally in earth-tones, with white, brown, and black being most common, however, blue dresses and aprons are reserved for married women, while white is for the unmarried ones. Unlike the Croats from the north, the special sandals ( opanci ) are worn daily. However, liberties are taken with the apron, which is often woven with colorful stitching and patterns with geometric motifs. Multi-colored wool socks ( priglavci or nazuvci ) with various geometric design are worn over the opanci . For headwear, women wear embroidered kerchiefs or white kerchiefs pinned to their hats. Jewelry such as earrings, bracelets, and necklaces are silver, and necklaces ( djerdan ) and earrings are often made of silver coins, traditionally from the 19th century Austrian coins ( talira ). \n\nThe costume of the men varies when taking military uniform in consideration. A simple costume would have trousers and a linen shirt of either white, black or brown color (or blue for military men). The vests can be made of leather, or wool that are either black or red, and can be simple with no designs, or very elaborately designed with intricate patterns. Black or blue coats or capes made of lamb fur are worn during the winter. Red belts or sashes are tied around their waists and used to hold guns or swords, a remnant from the military era. A special carved knife from the Ottoman days (called a handžar or nož ) are mainly used. A special cap exclusive to the region is the Lika cap that is worn by all men, regardless of social position.\n\nDalmatian costume varies from within its own region; while the coastal areas are Adriatic and Italian in influence, the inner area, called Zagora , shows the Dinaric influence similar to the style of Lika and Herzegovina .\n\nPerhaps the most famous example of Zagora costume comes from the small town of Vrlika , rich in dance and tradition still carried on today. Both men and women's dress wear is characterized by multiple subjects of clothing over another. For men, the costume consists of carefully chosen pieces worn over each other: a red sash is tied around dark pants with a fringe of threads hanging from the belt in red, blue, or green colors. Due to centuries of military mentality, a special leather belt is worn to carry weapons. Over the shirt is a decorated tunic, elaborate in design and custom-made fringe. The vest that is worn is vastly decorated with gold and red embroidery and patterns and designs, with different styles or material and cut depending on the seasonal weather. Much like the men, the women's dress consists of clothing worn over more clothing: a white blouse, skirt or tunic is most common, with a colorful apron consisting of complicated geometric patterns and fringe worn over, as well as a red vest with gold stitching made in a way to make it stand out from the white blouse. Jewellery consists mainly of beads worn around the neck and silver coins adorned around the costume. Both men and women wear red felt pillbox caps ( bareta or crvenkapa ), with a white habit attached to the women's.\n\nFrom the coast, the national costume of Dubrovnik consists mainly of white, black, gold, and red colors. Both men and women wear vests rich with gold embroidery while the women wear the recognizable gold tassels decorating the front blouse and fine jewelry such as earrings, necklaces and hair clips. Men and women usually wear white or black trousers or skirts respectively.\n\nThe islands of Croatia have the most variation in dress due to their geographic distance and isolation from one another. They find more similarity with Dalmatia and Istria, but many have their own unique styles not seen elsewhere.\n\nFor example, the national costume from the island of Pag has its origins in the fifteenth century, and is characterized by the intricate lace that decorates the front part of blouses and the edges of kerchiefs. The famous lace work of Pag is renowned for its precision and beauty, and is the most prominent part of the costume apart from the large white headdresses worn by the women of the island. Women wear long-sleeved blouses and full pleated skirts (usually gold or red in color) with a red silk scarf tied around their waist. The men wear vests over their shirts with form-fitting trousers with a red silk handkerchief worn around the waist and red hats.\n\nCroatian dress from Bosnia and Herzegovina fall under the Dinaric category of dress style, and regional variations between western Herzegovina and central Bosnia is most prominent. In Herzegovina, the style of dress is vastly similar to the inland Dalmatian style.\n\nIn central Bosnia however, the Ottoman influence is more prominently shown. For women, the dress is mainly white heavy cotton with puckered vertical stripes, while the collar is embroidered with a crocheted trim and dotted with sequins. The vest is generally dark in color with a golden trim embroidered along the edges, and the apron is made of wool, dyed usually red, black, or dark green with minimal designs. If no apron is worn, than the dress may consist of special embroidery and crocheted lace, and pantaloons (gače) are worn with white, knee-length stockings ( čarape ). The sash ( tkanica ) worn around the waist is black with green and gold wool handwoven within. The headscarf can be a kerchief ( krpa ) with various geometric designs and/or floral embroidery, or more elaborate kind ( čember ) with a crocheted edge with a wide band of multi-colored geometric embroidery on one side and half of opposite side. \n\nIn northern Bosnia, cultural influences from Slavonia and central Europe are evident in Croat costumes, especially in the region of Bosnian Posavina . Both male and female costumes make good use of linen fabric, often embroidered with traditional floral and geometric patterns similar to those found among Croat and Serbian communities in eastern Croatia and northern Serbia . Dense wool aprons with geometric or plaid patterns are common in female costumes. Vests adorned with central European and Ottoman-influenced embroidery patterns are common for both men and women. Female headpieces tend to vary from region to region, while men usually wear hats resembling the Trilby style. In some regions, female headpieces make use of wool spools and pom-pom-like structures, most notably in the areas around Usora , Derventa , Bosanski Brod , Odžak and Brčko .\n\nFor men, white cotton shirts with wide sleeves and black pants with a fringed leg are the basic elements of the costume. The vest is made of thick wool and is dark in color and can be embroidered or crocheted like the females'. The sash around the waist varies in color from region, but is usually dark. Socks are worn to knee length much like the females, and are usually white, red, or gold in color. \n\nThe Croatian dress from Serbia comes mainly from the Vojvodina region in the north, with the impact of the Pannonian style figuring very strongly. The most common color for both men and women to wear is white, with elaborate embroidery or stitching at the ends or hems or the sleeves, trousers, or skirts. They would wear blue or black aprons and vests over their garments with gold embroidery. But the most notable Croatian costumes come from the Bačka region, where for centuries the women have ordered the silk for their costumes from Lyon , France . They come in a rich blue color that has made them recognizable throughout the region.\n\nThe Croats from Kosovo have a dress that has a more Dinaric style, having adapted many of the Vardarian style of dress into their traditional costumes. They are called Janjevci , derived from the villages the majority are from. Since most are descended from Dubrovnik traders seven centuries back, they have maintained certain elements of Dubrovnik style clothing that is reflected in their national dress. Due to conflicts plaguing Kosovo over the years, many have migrated to Croatia, where a large cultural community has been set up in Zagreb , preserving the songs, dances, and culture of the Janjevci. \n\nCroatian minorities in nearby countries such as Hungary , Romania , Italy , Montenegro and Austria continue to have their own traditional dress influenced both by their ancestor's original costume and adaptation of certain local regional styles.\n\nIn Hungary, the native Croats often participate in cultural festivities wearing their national costumes, which have been heavily influence by Hungarian style with elaborate colors and rich material.\n\nIn Austria, the Croatian Cultural Association helps maintain the culture of the local Croats by sponsoring local kolo, where traditional costumes from Nikitsch show the German and Austrian Alpine influence.",
  "Su Nuraxi is a Nuragic archaeological site in Barumini , Sardinia , Italy . Su Nuraxi simply means \"The Nuraghe\" in Campidanese , the southern variant of the Sardinian language .\n\nSu Nuraxi is a settlement consisting of a seventeenth century BC nuraghe , a bastion of four corner towers plus a central one, and a village inhabited from the thirteenth to the sixth century BC, developed around the nuraghe. They are considered by scholars the most impressive expression of the nuragic civilization and were included in the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites in 1997 as Su Nuraxi di Barumini .\n\nThe oldest part of the Nuraghe consists of a central tower with three superposed chambers (18.6m high). It was built in blocks of basalt between the seventeenth and thirteenth centuries BCE. Later, during the Late Bronze Age , four towers joined by a curtain wall with an upper balcony (no longer extant) were built around the central tower, all communicating with an inner courtyard served by a well. During the Iron Age , the complex was surrounded by a curtain wall with seven lobes (heptalobate).\n\nThe real function of the nuraghe is still debated. The discoverer of Su Nuraxi, the archaeologist Giovanni Lilliu , confirmed the traditional interpretation of fortress-site. Other archaeologists believe that the oldest part of the complex was destined for a religious purpose, refuge, civil or even parliament or registered the village chief, while the towers were added perhaps intended for military purposes and stock.\n\nA village, intended to accommodate the surrounding population, was built around the Nuraghe in the Late Bronze Age. The many phases of life in the village render it impossible to establish the number of huts in one phase, the number of huts varied from forty to two hundred, so the population ranged from 100 to 1000 inhabitants and the settlement was built on a circular plan with large boulders covered with dry stone walls and conical roofs made of wood and branches. Though the huts were structured in a single unit in more remote periods, there was a later, more prevalent tendency to subdivide housing into individual units. Of the huts found, the most significant appear to have been reserved for meetings of the local leaders. These huts were larger and more complex in structure, and the hut reserved for the inhabitants' meetings contained symbols of the deities worshiped by locals. Other rooms have been identified as workshops, kitchens, and agricultural processing centres. During the 9-8th century BC a sewerage system was built along with a paved square and streets. \n\nDuring the sixth century BCE, the buildings were destroyed and subsequently restored by Carthage before being occupied by the Romans . They were eventually completely abandoned.\n\nThe nuraghe and the village were strategically connected to the system of other Nuraghes, such as the polylobate nuraghe found beneath the fifteenth-century Palazzo Zapata in the village of Barumini.\n\nThe archaeological site was fully excavated between 1950 and 1957 under the direction of Giovanni Lilliu , a local expert. The excavations allowed archaeologists to retrace the different stages of the construction of the towers and surrounding village, confirming that the entire complex was a vibrant, vital centre up to the first century BCE, during the Roman period.\n\nExcavations brought to light important remains in the form of tools, weapons, pottery, and ornaments.\n\nThere is another important nuragic site at nearby Casa Zapata, the important finds of which are on display at the site's museum.",
  "Open Season 2 is a 2008 American animated comedy film and the second in the Open Season film series . It was directed by Matthew O'Callaghan . It premiered theatrically in South Africa on September 24, 2008, and was released direct-to-video in the United States on January 27, 2009. The film received mixed reviews and grossed $8.7 million worldwide.\n\nIn the spring, Elliot has grown giant new antlers and is about to marry Giselle. However, Elliot's new antlers are cracked off in an accident, which upsets him. Believing that his cracked antlers are a sign of bad luck and after hearing words being spoken by Ian during the wedding ceremony, Elliot begins to have second thoughts. Meanwhile, Mr. Weenie finds a dog biscuit trail that his previous owners left behind and follows it. At the climax of the wedding, Elliot witnesses Mr. Weenie being taken away by his old owners, Bob and Bobbie. Elliot tells an exaggerated story to the other forest animals about Bobbie torturing Mr. Weenie (made possible by his misinterpretation of Bobbie's excessive affections toward Mr. Weenie) and decides to make a rescue mission to save him while also using it to avoid marrying Giselle until his giant antlers grow back. Boog, Elliot, Giselle, McSquizzy, Buddy, Serge and Deni set off on a rescue mission under Boog's lead.\n\nMeanwhile, the pets of Bob and Bobbie's friends – on their way to Pet Paradiso, a resort for humans and their pets - meet at a rest stop. There is Fifi, a toy poodle and his basset hound companion Roberto, two cats named Stanley and Roger, and two Southern dogs named Rufus and Charlene. Fifi discusses his hatred for wild animals, describing how he claims they got him shocked by a bug zapper . He then tries to maul a nearby rabbit, until he's stopped by his owner. Meanwhile, the wilds find Weenie, much to Elliot's dismay. They try to free him while his owners stop at a gas station. They free him from his chains, but because of Elliot's impulsiveness and clumsiness, they accidentally leave him stuck in the RV along with Buddy. Elliot and Giselle have an argument, and eventually leave Elliot to search for Mr. Weenie himself, while Serge and Deni fly to look for him.\n\nThe owners reach the pet camp with Mr. Weenie and Buddy. The other pets meet with Weenie, and Fifi tries to revert Weenie back into his pet state, but Weenie resists. Buddy helps Weenie escape and Buddy tries to free Weenie from his shock collar. During the chase, Fifi gets shocked by the collar and gets the fur on his forehead burned, causing him to lose most of his sanity and vow revenge.\n\nMeanwhile, Serge and Deni return and explain they found Weenie and Buddy at a pet camp, unaware that the two have already escaped. Boog and the others set up camp, and Boog fails to convince Giselle that Elliot is a good person and that they belong together. The wilds realize that they have gone to Pet Paradiso. Weenie and Buddy find Elliot in the woods and convince him to go to Pet Paradiso to save his friends.\n\nThe wilds try to sneak into Pet Paradiso by disguising themselves as pets, with Giselle as a dalmatian and McSquizzy as a chihuahua . Boog attempts to sneak in as a cat, but proves to be too large to pass off as one. He then changes his disguise to a sheepdog . After Elliot, Mr. Weenie, and Buddy meet up with Boog, Elliot also disguises himself as Boog's human owner and they sneak in. Giselle and McSquizzy walk around Pet Paradiso looking for Mr. Weenie, but their cover is blown and are captured by Fifi and the other pets and taken to their secret lair beneath the resort's waterslide. Elliot, Buddy and Mr. Weenie attempt to go inside to save Giselle and McSquizzy, but Mr. Weenie, missing being a pet again, goes to play on the waterslide, leaving the rest except Boog to be captured by Fifi, while Boog tries to catch Mr. Weenie.\n\nFifi tries to kill them all with a pile of shock collars. As Boog tries to stop Mr. Weenie from going down the waterslide, his cover is blown and security attempts to tranquilize him. Before Fifi shocks the wilds into submission , Elliot, having learned to trust himself more than his antlers, tries to profess his love for Giselle, only to be berated by her for leaving her at the altar and using Mr. Weenie's \"kidnapping\" as an excuse. As Fifi is about to kill them, Boog enters the lair via the water slide and the liquid flushes everyone out.\n\nA battle between the wilds and pets ensues, with the Pet Paradiso security focused on tranquilizing the wilds. While Boog tricks security into tranquilizing themselves, Elliot saves Giselle, accidentally placing all the shock collars on himself. He wrestles Fifi in the pool for the shock collar remote; Fifi eventually grabs the remote and activates the collars, only to realize that Elliot has attached the collars to him. Fifi survives the electrocution but loses all his fur, humiliating him further. The pets and the wilds settle their differences and decide to become friends. Mr. Weenie, wanting to be a pet again, decides to join the pets and returns to his owners in rejoice. Returning to the woods, Elliot finally professes his true feelings for Giselle, and they get married.\n\nSony announced a sequel to Open Season in September 2007. Although the original grossed $85.1 million in the United States and $115.7 million in foreign countries, Sony felt the film performed much better on DVD, thus, making a direct-to-DVD sequel. Sony Pictures Digital president said that \"the studio will keep Open Season 2's costs low by utilizing Imageworks ' satellite facilities in India and New Mexico\". \n\nAlthough Open Season 2 was released direct-to-video in the United States and the United Kingdom, it was released theatrically in some countries. In South Africa on its opening day, the film grossed $84,244 from 26 screens with an $2,081 average. In Russia, it opened with $2,835,600 from 360 screens with a $7,877 average. In Poland, it opened with $194,339 from 75 screens with an $2,591 average. In total, the film grossed $8,716,950. \n\nCritic at DVD Verdict claimed, \" Open Season 2 is no classic (neither was the original), but it's a competent check-your-brain-at-the-door comedy for children of all ages. The animation and storytelling may not stack up against Pixar's (whose does?), but the flick offers something that Pixar movies generally don't: old cartoon slapstick and sight gags in the mold of Bugs Bunny \". \n\nOpen Season 2 was released on DVD , Blu-ray Disc and PSP UMD on January 27, 2009. \n\nThe sequel Open Season 3 premiered in theaters in Russia on October 21, 2010, and was released on DVD and Blu-ray in United States on January 25, 2011. Open Season: Scared Silly premiered in theaters in Turkey on December 18, 2015, and was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the United States and Canada on March 8, 2016. It serves as a standalone sequel, acknowledging the events of the original movie but not those of the second and third.",
  "City comedy , also known as citizen comedy , is a genre of comedy in the English early modern theatre .\n\nOur Scene is London , 'cause we would make known, No country's mirth is better than our own. No clime breeds better matter, for your whore, Bawd, squire, imposter, many persons more\n\nEmerging from Ben Jonson 's late- Elizabethan comedies of humours (1598–1599), the conventions of city comedy developed rapidly in the first decade of the Jacobean era , as one playwright's innovations were soon adopted by others, such that by about 1605 the new genre was fully established. Its principal playwrights were Jonson himself, Thomas Middleton , and John Marston , though many others also contributed to its development, including Thomas Heywood , Thomas Dekker , John Day , and John Webster . Once the companies of boy players —the Children of Paul's and the Children of the Chapel —had resumed public performances from 1600 onwards, most of their plays were city comedies. The closest that William Shakespeare 's plays come to the genre is the slightly earlier The Merry Wives of Windsor (c. 1597), which is his only play set entirely in England; it avoids the caustic satire of city comedy, however, in preference for a more bourgeois mode (with its dual romantic plots governed by socio-economics not love or sex), while its setting, Windsor , is a town rather than a city. \n\nIn contrast to the adventurous chronicles of Elizabethan comedy, such as Thomas Dekker 's The Shoemaker's Holiday (1599) or George Peele 's The Old Wives' Tale (c. 1590), or the intricately plotted romantic comedies of Shakespeare and John Lyly , city comedy was more realistic (excluding magical or marvellous elements) and sharp and satirical in tone. It portrayed a broad range of characters from different ranks (often focused on citizens), employing \"deeds and language such as men do use\", as Jonson put it, and was usually set in London . \n\nDuring the Tudor period the Reformation had produced a gradual shift to Protestantism and much of London passed from church to private ownership. The Royal Exchange was founded in this period. Mercantilism grew, and monopoly trading companies such as the East India Company were established, with trade expanding to the New World . London became the principal North Sea port, with migrants arriving from England and abroad. The population rose from an estimated 50,000 in 1530 to about 225,000 in 1605. City comedies depict London as a hotbed of vice and folly; in particular, Jonson's Epicoene , Middleton's A Trick to Catch the Old One and A Chaste Maid in Cheapside , and Marston's The Dutch Courtesan.\n\nVerna Foster has argued that John Ford's 'Tis Pity She's a Whore (c. 1629–1633) re-works many of the features of city comedy within a tragic drama. ",
  "Julia Aleksandrovna Vysotskaya ( Russian : Юлия Александровна Высоцкая ; born 16 August 1973) is a Russian actress and television presenter.\n\nJulia Vysotskaya was born in Novocherkassk , Rostov Oblast , Russian SFSR , Soviet Union (now Russia ). She finished high school № 9 in the city of Baku in 1990. She graduated in drama from the Belarusian State Academy of Arts in 1995 and the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art in 1998. \n\nShe worked at the Belarusian Janka Kupała National Academic Theatre, where she played the lead role in productions of The Star Without a Name and The Bald Soprano (both by Romanian playwrights) among others.\n\nShe has acted in productions staged at the Mossovet Academy Theatre .\n\nSince 2003 she has presented the evening programme Let's Eat at Home! and the morning show Breakfast with Julia Vysotskaya on NTV .\n\nIn 2008 she was invited to be the culinary supervisor at a Russian evening held during the World Economic Forum in London. In 2009 she was culinary director of the Moscow restaurant \"Family Floor\".\n\nShe has been the editor-in-chief of the culinary magazine KhlebSol since 2009, year in which she also helped set up the www.edimdoma.ru culinary social network and the first online cooking channel www.edimdoma.tv where users can watch Julia Vysotskaya preparing dishes, and her video blog, which is regularly updated with new content.\n\nVysotskaya is the author of numerous cookery best-sellers, of which she has already sold over one and half million copies.\n\nThe actress has received wide acclaim for her portrayal of Olga in the 2016 Holocaust drama Paradise . \n\nShe has been married to film director Andrei Konchalovsky since 1998. They have two children, a daughter, Maria (1999), and a son, Petr (2003).",
  "Eraclio Petri (29 January 1929 – 10 November 1982), commonly known as Elio Petri , was an Italian film and theatre director, screenwriter and film critic. The Museum of Modern Art described him as \"one of the preeminent political and social satirists of 1960s and early 1970s Italian cinema\". His film Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion won the 1971 Academy Award for Best Foreign-Language Film , and his subsequent film The Working Class Goes to Heaven received the Palme d'Or at the 1972 Cannes Film Festival . \n\nOther noted films by Petri include The 10th Victim (1965), the prize-winning We Still Kill the Old Way (1967) and A Quiet Place in the Country (1968), and the controversially received Todo modo (1976). \n\nPetri was born in Rome on 29 January 1929. In 1944, he joined the youth organization of the Italian Communist Party (PCI). After graduating from Rome University as a literature major, he wrote articles on films for L'Unità , Gioventù nuova as well as for Città aperta . He later left the Communist Party after the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 . \n\nGianni Puccini introduced Petri to neorealist director Giuseppe De Santis in the early 1950s. In the following years, Petri became a steady collaborator on De Santis' films, as a researcher for Rome 11:00 (1952), and as an assistant director and co-writer from A Husband for Anna (1953) until La garçonnière (1960). In addition, Petri wrote scripts for Giuliano Puccini, Aglauco Casadio and Carlo Lizzani during this period, and directed two documentary shorts, Nasce un campione (1954) and I sette contadini (1957). \n\nPetri made his feature film debut as a director with The Assassin (also titled The Lady Killer of Rome , 1961), starring Marcello Mastroianni as an egotistical social careerist accused of the murder of his former mistress. It was the first of four scenarios/screenplays written together with Tonino Guerra , and the first of Mastroianni's repeated appearances in Petri's films. The Assassin marked a deliberate departure from neorealism, examining his protagonist's psychology: \"The protagonist of Bicycle Thieves today must face not only the society he lives in but also his own consciousness\", Petri stated in an interview the following year. The film was a success both with the audience and the critics, enabling the financing of Petri's second film, His Days Are Numbered (1962), again co-written with Guerra. Other than The Assassin , His Days Are Numbered , the story of a plumber who becomes aware of his own mortality and stops going to work, was not a success. \n\nPetri's next two directorial efforts, The Teacher from Vigevano (1963), a comedy drama about the troubles of a provincial school teacher, and Peccato nel pomeriggio , his contribution to the anthology film High Infidelity (1964), are regarded as lesser works by film historians. While preparing The 10th Victim , he participated in the sexy mondo film Nudi per vivere (1964), working under a pseudonym. The 10th Victim (1965), a satirical look at a future society finding distraction in a televised manhunt, met with reservations by some critics for being a commercial \"compromise\" by its director, but was successful with the audience. \n\nWe Still Kill the Old Way (1967), a crime drama following a murder investigation hindered by local power structures in rural Sicily , was adapted from the novel To Each His Own by Leonardo Sciascia and received the Best Screenplay Award at the 1967 Cannes Film Festival . The film marked the beginning of Petri's collaboration with screenwriter Ugo Pirro , which was to last until 1973, and was the first of four feature films by Petri to star Gian Maria Volontè . A Quiet Place in the Country (1968), a giallo thriller about an artist's deterioration into madness, won a Silver Bear award at the 19th Berlin International Film Festival , but was also dismissed by some critics as \"kitsch\" and \"nonsense\". \n\nWith Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion (1970), which, among other accolades, received the Academy Award for Best Foreign-Language Film and two prizes at the 1970 Cannes Film Festival , Petri presented one of his most successful films. A political thriller and black comedy about a murderous police officer who deliberately leaves traces leading to him at the site of his crime, Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion is Petri's only film to be later included in the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage 's list of 100 Italian films to be saved . In the same year, Petri participated in the political documentary films Documenti su Giuseppe Pinelli (also titled Dedicato a Pinelli ), about the unresolved death of anarchist Giuseppe Pinelli , and 12 Dicembre . \n\nThe Working Class Goes to Heaven (1971), again honoured at the Cannes Film Festival, and Property Is No Longer a Theft (1973) continued the director's fractured and black comedic style. The former film follows a factory worker who sides with political radicals and slowly loses his mind when he is no longer needed, the latter focusses on a bank clerk who quits his job and turns to robbery. Film historians would later refer to Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion , The Working Class Goes to Heaven and Property Is No Longer a Theft as the \"trilogy of neurosis\": neurosis of power, neurosis of work and neurosis of money. \n\nTodo modo (1976) was again adapted from a novel by Leonardo Sciascia. The film, a barely concealed satirical portrayal of Italy's then ruling Christian Democratic party and prime minister Aldo Moro , was received controversially upon its release and withdrawn from circulation after Moro's assassination two years later. Petri himself saw the film as a break with what he saw as \"popular\" political cinema, radical political films (both his and by other directors) produced within Italy's mainstream film industry. \n\nIn 1978, Petri directed Le mani sporche , a three-part television production of Jean-Paul Sartre 's play Dirty Hands starring Marcello Mastroianni. His last film was Good News (1979), a portrayal of a society emotionally deformed by an omnipresent mass media, which he co-produced with his star Giancarlo Giannini . In 1981, Petri directed Arthur Miller 's new play The American Clock at Genoa 's Teatro Duse, with Lino Capolicchio playing the lead role. \n\nPetri died of cancer on 10 November 1982 in Rome, 53 years old.\n\nAll films were also written or co-written by Petri, except where noted",
  "A champion (from the late Latin campio ) is the victor in a challenge, contest or competition . There can be a territorial pyramid of championships, e.g. local, regional/provincial/state, national, continental and world championships, and even further (artificial) divisions at one or more of these levels, as in association football . Their champions can be accordingly styled, e.g. national champion, world champion.\n\nIn certain disciplines, there are specific titles for champions, either descriptive, as the baspehlivan in Turkish oil wrestling, yokozuna in Japanese sumo wrestling ; or copied from social hierarchies, such as the koning and keizer ('king' and 'emperor') in traditional archery competitions (not just national, also at lower levels) in the Low Countries.\n\nThe original meaning of the word partakes of both these senses: in the Feudal Era , knights were expected to be champions and paragons of both prowess in combat and of causes, the latter most commonly being either patriotic, romantic or religious in nature (thus becoming models of virtue). This reaches its most literal meaning in a trial by combat , in which each combatant champions the cause of one side of the trial. A \" King's Champion \" is appointed for ceremonial purposes at the coronation of an English Monarch, to defeat any challenger to the monarch's right to be crowned.\n\nChampion warfare refers to a type of battle, most commonly found in the epic poetry and myth of ancient history, in which the outcome of the conflict is determined by single combat , an individual duel between the best soldiers (\"champions\") from each opposing army.\n\nWorld champion is a title used to denote a winner of a world championship in a particular sport (such as mixed martial arts , professional boxing or professional wrestling ), discipline or game. Being a champion at any sport or game requires an extraordinary amount of focus, discipline, drive and complete dedication, usually from a young age. What separates a world champion from the average competitor aside from natural ability and environmental advantages with access to the best training facilities, is the ability to focus on their goal and to become the best of the best, the obsession to continually improve and mental conditioning required to focus on becoming the best in the world at their given subject. ",
  "Nori ( Japanese : 海苔 ) is a dried edible seaweed used in Japanese cuisine, usually made from species of the red algae genus Pyropia , including P. yezoensis and P. tenera . It has a strong and distinctive flavor, and is generally made into flat sheets and used to wrap rolls of sushi or onigiri (rice balls).\n\nThe finished dried sheets are made by a shredding and rack-drying process that resembles papermaking . They are sold in packs in grocery stores for culinary purposes. Since nori sheets easily absorb water from the air and degrade, a desiccant is needed when storing nori for any significant time.\n\nNori—despite not being cultivated by humans until the 1600s—has been popular since the pre-modern era in Japan, having been used as currency, offerings at shrines, and food since the 700s. \n\nOriginally, the term nori was generic and referred to seaweeds , including hijiki . One of the earliest descriptions of nori is dated to around the eighth century. In the Taihō Code of 701 CE, nori was already included in the form of taxation. Local people were described as drying nori in the Hitachi Province Fudoki (721–721 CE), and harvesting of nori was mentioned in the Izumo Province Fudoki (713–733 CE). In the Utsubo Monogatari , written around 987 CE, nori was recognized as a common food.\n\nNori had been consumed as paste form until the sheet form ( ita-nori 板海苔) was invented in Asakusa , Tokyo , around 1750 in the Edo period through the method of Japanese paper-making . \n\nThe word \" nori \" first appeared in an English-language publication in C. P. Thunberg's Trav. , published in 1796. It was used in conjugation as \" Awa nori \", probably referring to what now is called \" aonori \", i.e., green laver . \n\nWhen Japan was in need of high food production after World War II , production of nori was in decline. They sought to cultivate nori in addition to traditional wild harvesting from the sea. Due to a lack of understanding of nori's three-stage life cycle, however, those attempting to produce nori artificially did not understand why their cultivation methods were not being productive with nori. The industry was rescued by knowledge derived from the work of British phycologist Kathleen Mary Drew-Baker , who had been researching the organism Porphyria umbilicalis that grew in the seas around Wales and was harvested for food ( laverbread ), as in Japan. Her work was discovered by Japanese scientists who applied it to artificial methods of seeding and growing the nori, rescuing the industry. Kathleen Baker was hailed in Japan as the \"Mother of the Sea\" and a statue was erected in her memory. She is still revered as the savior of the Japanese nori industry.\n\nThe word nori started to be used widely in the United States and the product (imported in dry form from Japan) became widely available at natural food stores and Asian-American grocery stores in the 1960s due to the macrobiotic movement and in the 1970s with the increase of sushi bars and Japanese restaurants. \n\nIn the 21st century, the Japanese nori industry faces a new decline due to increased competition from seaweed producers in China and Korea, and an increase in domestic sales tax. \n\nProduction and processing of nori is an advanced form of agriculture. The biology of Pyropia , although complicated, now is well understood, and this knowledge is used to control the production process. Farming takes place in the sea where the Pyropia plants grow attached to nets suspended at the sea surface and where the farmers operate from boats. The plants grow rapidly, requiring approximately 45 days from \"seeding\" until the first harvest. Multiple harvests can be taken from a single seeding, typically at approximately ten-day intervals. Harvesting is accomplished using mechanical harvesters of a variety of configurations. Processing of raw product is mostly accomplished by highly automated machines that accurately duplicate traditional manual processing steps, but with much improved efficiency and consistency. The final product is a paper-thin, black, dried sheet of approximately 18 cm × 20 cm (7 in × 8 in) and 3 grams (0.11 oz) in weight.\n\nSeveral grades of nori are available in the United States. The most common (and least expensive) grades are imported from China, costing approximately six cents per sheet. At the high end, ranging up to 90 cents per sheet, are \"delicate shin-nori \" ( nori from the first of the year's several harvests) cultivated in the Ariake Sea , off the island of Kyushu in Japan. \n\nIn Japan, more than 600 square kilometres (230 sq mi) of coastal waters are given to producing 350,000 tonnes (340,000 long tons) of nori, worth more than a billion dollars. China produces approximately a third of this amount. \n\nWild seaweed is still gathered to make nori, often found growing on rocks at the beach. Such wild nori is called iwanori (\"rock nori\"), and are known for their rougher texture and taste.\n\nNori is commonly used as a wrap for sushi and onigiri (rice balls). The dry seaweed is used to pick up rice balls without getting the hands sticky. Senbei (rice crackers) sometimes contain a piece of nori as well.\n\nStrips or small sheets of nori are used as garnish for noodles, soups, and rice dishes. Flakes of nori are used in furikake seasonings, to be sprinkled over rice or added to onigiri . Very small flakes or powdered nori can be dusted over a variety of savory foods.\n\nTypically, nori is toasted prior to consumption. Toasted nori is called yaki-nori . A common secondary product is toasted and flavored nori ( ajitsuke-nori ), in which a flavoring mixture (variable, but typically soy sauce , sugar, sake , mirin , and seasonings) is applied in combination with the toasting process. Nori is also eaten by making it into a soy sauce-flavored paste, nori no tsukudani ( 海苔の佃煮 ). Sometimes it is also used as a form of food decoration , such as creating faces or anime characters in bento boxes.\n\nA related product, prepared from the unrelated green algae Monostroma and Enteromorpha , is called aonori ( 青海苔 literally blue/green nori ) and it is used as an herb on everyday meals, such as okonomiyaki and yakisoba .\n\nRaw seaweed is 85% water, 6% protein , 5% carbohydrates , and has negligible fat . In a 100 gram reference amount, seaweed is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value , DV) of vitamin A , vitamin C , riboflavin , and folate . Seaweed is a moderate source (less than 20% DV) of niacin , iron , and zinc . Seaweed has a high content of iodine , providing a substantial amount in just one gram. A 2014 study reported that dried purple laver (\"nori\") contains vitamin B12 in sufficient quantities to meet the RDA requirement (Vitamin B12 content: 77.6 μg /100 g dry weight). By contrast, however, a 2017 review concluded that vitamin B12 may be destroyed during metabolism or is converted into inactive B12 analogs during drying and storage. The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics stated in 2016 that nori is not an adequate source of vitamin B12 for humans. [ failed verification ]\n\nNori may contain toxic metals ( arsenic and cadmium ), whose levels are highly variable among nori products. It also contains amphipod allergens that may cause serious allergic reactions, especially in highly sensitized crustacean-allergic people.\n\nThe red algae genera is also consumed in Korean cuisine as gim , in Chinese cuisine as haitai (海苔) or zicai (紫菜), and in Wales and Ireland as laverbread .",
  "740 Park Avenue is a luxury cooperative apartment building on the west side of Park Avenue between East 71st and 72nd Streets in the Lenox Hill section of the Upper East Side of Manhattan , New York City, New York. It was described in Business Insider in 2011 as \"a legendary address\" that was \"at one time considered (and still thought to be by some) the most luxurious and powerful residential building in New York City\". The \"pre-war\" building's side entrance address is 71 East 71st Street. \n\nThe 19-story building was designed in an Art Deco architectural style and consists of 31 units, including duplexes and triplexes. The architectural height of the building is 256.0 feet (78.0 m).\n\nThe building was constructed in 1929 by James T. Lee , the grandfather of First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis – who lived there as a child as Jacqueline Bouvier – and was designed by Rosario Candela and Arthur Loomis Harmon ; Harmon became a partner of the newly named Shreve, Lamb and Harmon during the year of construction. The building was officially opened in October 1930, a year after the Great Depression began, and the poor timing was devastating. Even though the New York elite had moved in, the building had failed financially by 1933. It remained in the red for 50 years. It was not until the 1980s that the building's apartments sold for incredibly high prices. \n\nIn 1937, one of the first well-known residents was John D. Rockefeller Jr. , who moved into 15/16B, a duplex that many still consider New York's crown jewel apartment. According to New York City real estate lore, \"whoever inherits the biggest penthouse at 740 inherits the throne of New York society itself.\" In 1971, Saul Steinberg bought that triplex for $285,000 (equivalent to $2,213,000 in 2024) and after two divorces sold it to Stephen Schwarzman for \"slightly above or below $30 million\" in 2000. This was the highest price ever paid on Park Avenue until May 2012, when Howard Marks paid $52.5 million for two adjoining two-story duplexes (totaling 30 rooms), which set a short-lived record as the highest price ever paid for a co-op apartment. \n\nIn 1979, the French government purchased an 18-room duplex for $600,000 to be used as their United Nations ambassador's residence. The French government's duplex unit was sold in June 2014 for $70 million, reportedly $22 million over the asking price – a bidding war involving three prospective buyers escalated the eventual selling price. The buyer was hedge fund billionaire Israel Englander , who already lived in the unit directly above, and surpassed a record set just days earlier by Egypt's richest man, Nassef Sawiris , for a penthouse unit on nearby Fifth Avenue . \n\nIn 2005, author Michael Gross published a detailed book on the building and its history, 740 Park: The Story of the World's Richest Apartment Building . According to Gross, builder Lee's daughter, Janet Lee Bouvier , and son-in-law Jack Bouvier , attained the final open lease; according to one account, they did not pay for the lease. Hedge fund manager David Ganek paid $19 million for the childhood duplex home of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis in 2005. \n\nThe residents of 740 Park were heavily affected by the financial crisis of 2007–2008 , as many of the residents are hedge fund billionaires as opposed to the titans of industry like Rockefeller who moved in during the 1930s. The building was once home to one of the world's largest private collections of Mark Rothko works. The former owner—alleged Bernie Madoff middleman and ex-financier J. Ezra Merkin—still lives there, but the paintings were sold during the Madoff scandal .\n\nHedge fund billionaire Charles Stevenson paid $9 million for an apartment in the building and was the head of the 740 Park Avenue cooperative in December 2011. \n\nIn 2012, the Alex Gibney documentary Park Avenue: Money, Power and the American Dream , based on the Michael Gross book, aired on the \"Independent Lens\" series of the PBS TV network. The film details that the building was home to the highest concentration of billionaires in the United States. \n\nApplicants who have sought to purchase units in the building but have been refused include Barbra Streisand , Neil Sedaka and Russian billionaire Leonard Blavatnik . \n\nNotes\n\nBibliography",
  "Danish philosophy has a long tradition as part of Western philosophy . \n\nPerhaps the most influential Danish philosopher was Søren Kierkegaard , the creator of Christian existentialism , which inspired the philosophical movement of Existentialism . Kierkegaard had a few Danish followers, including Harald Høffding , who later in his life moved on to join the movement of positivism . Among Kierkegaard's other followers include Jean-Paul Sartre who was impressed with Kierkegaard's views on the individual, and Rollo May , who helped create humanistic psychology . Danish philosophy was also strongly influenced by French hermeneutics philosopher Paul Ricœur . \n\nThis Denmark -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .\n\nThis philosophy -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Dino Buzzati-Traverso ( Italian pronunciation: [ˈdiːno butˈtsaːti] ; 14 October 1906 – 28 January 1972) was an Italian novelist, short story writer, painter and poet, as well as a journalist for Corriere della Sera . His worldwide fame is mostly due to his novel The Tartar Steppe , although he is also known for his well-received collections of short stories.\n\nBuzzati was born in San Pellegrino, Belluno , in his family's ancestral villa. Buzzati's mother, a veterinarian by profession, was Venetian and his father, a professor of international law , was from an old Bellunese family. Buzzati was the second of his parents' four children. One of his brothers was the well-known Italian geneticist Adriano Buzzati-Traverso . In 1924, he enrolled in the law faculty of the University of Milan , where his father once taught. As he was completing his studies in law, he was hired, at the age of 22, by the Milanese newspaper Corriere della Sera , where he would remain employed until his death. He began in the editorial department. Later he worked as a reporter, special correspondent, essayist, editor, and art critic. It is often said that his journalistic background informs his writing, lending even the most fantastic tales an aura of realism.\n\nBuzzati himself commented on the connection (as cited by Lawrence Venuti ):\n\nIt seems to me, fantasy should be as close as possible to journalism. The right word is not \"banalizing\", although in fact a little of this is involved. Rather, I mean that the effectiveness of a fantastic story will depend on its being told in the most simple and practical terms. \n\nDuring World War II , Buzzati served in Africa as a journalist attached to the Regia Marina . After the end of the war, Il deserto dei Tartari was published nationwide in Italy and quickly brought critical recognition and fame to the author. He married Almerina Antoniazzi in 1966. He published his last novel, Un amore, concerning love, in that year. In 1972, Buzzati died of cancer after a protracted illness. \n\nBuzzati began writing fiction in 1933. His works of fiction include five novels, theatre and radio plays, librettos , numerous books of short stories, and poetry. His libretti include four for operas by Luciano Chailly , as well as one for La giacca dannata by Giulio Viozzi .\n\nHe wrote a children's book, La famosa invasione degli orsi in Sicilia (translated by Frances Lobb into English as The Bears' Famous Invasion of Sicily ). Lemony Snicket wrote an introduction and reader's companion to a 2005 English edition.\n\nAlso an artist, Buzzati combined his artistic and writing exploits into making a comic book based on the myth of Orpheus , Poem Strip . Commenting on the graphic element, he once explained that \"for me, painting and writing are the same thing.\" \n\nThe Tartar Steppe , his most famous novel, tells the story of a military outpost that awaits a Tartar invasion. In its sentiment and its conclusions, it has been compared to existentialist works, notably Albert Camus 's The Myth of Sisyphus . \n\nHis writing is sometimes cited as magical realism or social alienation . The fate of the environment and fantasy in the face of unbridled technological progress are recurring themes. He wrote a variety of short stories featuring fantastic animals such as the bogeyman and, his own invention, the colomber ( il colombre ). His Sessanta racconti collection of sixty stories, which won the Strega Prize in 1958, features elements of science fiction , fantasy , and horror . \n\nCompilations in English\n\nIn 2019, the Australian singer, songwriter, and guitarist from Last Dinosaurs Lachlan Caskey, known as Notes From Under Ground, referenced Buzzati on his solo album Partner by making his name one of the song titles.",
  "Alternative comics or independent comics cover a range of American comics that have appeared since the 1980s, following the underground comix movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Alternative comics present an alternative to mainstream superhero comics which in the past have dominated the American comic book industry. They span across a wide range of genres , artistic styles, and subjects.\n\nAlternative comics are often published in small numbers with less regard for regular distribution schedules.\n\nMany alternative comics have variously been labelled as post-underground comics , independent comics , indie comics , auteur comics , small press comics , new wave comics , creator-owned comics , art comics , or literary comics . Many self-published \" minicomics \" also fall under the \"alternative\" umbrella.\n\nBy the mid-1970s, artists within the underground comix scene felt that it had become less creative than it had been in the past. According to Art Spiegelman , \"What had seemed like a revolution simply deflated into a lifestyle. Underground comics were stereotyped as dealing only with sex, dope and cheap thrills. They got stuffed back into the closet, along with bong pipes and love beads , as things started to get uglier.\" In an attempt to address this, underground cartoonists moved to start magazines that anthologized new, artistically ambitious comics in the 1980s. RAW , a lavishly produced, large format anthology that was clearly intended to be seen as a work of art was founded by Spiegelman and his wife Françoise Mouly in 1980. Another magazine, Weirdo , was started by the leading figure in underground comix, Robert Crumb , in 1981.\n\nThese magazines reflected changes from the days of the underground comix. They had different formats from the old comix, and the selection of artists differed, too. RAW featured many European artists, Weirdo included photo-funnies and strange outsider art -type documents. Elfquest was based on a science fiction/fantasy theme with powerful female and male characters of varied races and cultures, and done in a bright and colourful manga -like style. The underground staples of sex, drugs and revolution were much less in evidence. More emphasis was placed on developing the craft of comics drawing and storytelling, with many artists aiming for work that was both subtler and more complex than was typical in the underground. This was true of much of the new work done by the established comix artists as well as the newcomers: Art Spiegelman's Maus , much celebrated for bringing a new seriousness to comics, was serialized in RAW.\n\nWhile fans debate the origins of self-publishing in the comics industry, many consider Dave Sim an early leader in this area. Starting in 1977, he primarily wrote, drew and published Cerebus the Aardvark , on his own under the \"Aardvark-Vanaheim Inc.\" imprint and announcing he would publish 300 issues of the series consecutively, something unheard of at the time for a self-published book. Sim is known for his activism in favor of creators' rights and his outspoken nature in regards to the industry. He often used the back of his comic to deliver \"messages from the President\", which were sometimes editorials concerning the comics industry and self-publishing .\n\nWendy and Richard Pini founded WaRP Graphics , one of the early American independent comics publishers, in 1977 and released the first issues of their long-running series, Elfquest , in February 1978. They followed with titles such as MythAdventures and related titles by Robert Asprin ; and Thunder Bunny , created by Martin Greim . WaRP was also the original publisher of A Distant Soil by Colleen Doran . As an alternative to most of the masculine-themed comics of its time – and even to this day – Elfquest became enormously popular among female comic book fans around the world, while also drawing a solid male fan base. WaRP Graphics paved the way for many independent and alternative comic book creators who came after them. At its peak in the mid-1980s, Elfquest was selling 100,000 copies per issue in the initial print run, attracting one of the largest followings of any direct-sale comic. Most issues up to No. 9 saw multiple printings. It was the visible success of Elfquest that inspired many other writers and artists to try their own hand at self-publishing. \n\nKevin Eastman and Peter Laird 's Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles , a series by Mirage Studios , was very influential on a new generation of creators and became a huge success story of self publishing.\n\nJeff Smith , a friend of Dave Sim, was also very influential in self-published comics, creating the highly popular and long-lived Bone . As with Sim with Cerebus and unlike mainstream comic books stories with their spontaneously generated and rambling narratives, Smith produced Bone as a story with a planned end.\n\nThe publishing house Fantagraphics published the work of a new generation of artists, notably Love and Rockets by the brothers Jaime , Gilbert and Mario Hernandez . \n\nDan DeBono published Indy – The Independent Comic Guide , a magazine covering only independent comics starting in 1994. It ran for 18 issues and featured covers by Daniel Clowes , Tim Vigil , Drew Hayes , William Tucci , Jeff Smith and Wendy and Richard Pini. \n\nAlternative comics have increasingly established themselves within the larger culture, as evidenced by the success of the feature film Ghost World based on one of the best selling alternative titles, Eightball , by Daniel Clowes and the cross-genre success of the book Jimmy Corrigan, the Smartest Kid on Earth , by Chris Ware , a story that was serialized in Ware's comic, Acme Novelty Library .\n\nImage Comics and Dark Horse Comics publish many alternative comics. Notable examples include Stan Sakai 's Usagi Yojimbo , Sergio Aragonés 's Groo the Wanderer , and James O'Barr 's The Crow .\n\nOni Press used the term \"real mainstream,\" coined by Stephen L. Holland of the UK comic shop Page 45, to describe its output. Traditional American comic books regard superhero titles as \"mainstream\" and all other genres as \"non-mainstream\", a reversal of the perception in other countries. Oni Press, therefore, adopted the \"real mainstream\" term to suggest that it publishes comic books and graphic novels whose subject matter is more in line with the popular genres of other media: thrillers , romances, realistic drama and so on. Oni Press avoids publishing superhero, fantasy and science fiction titles, unless interesting creators approach these concepts from an unusual angle.\n\nTop Shelf Productions has published many notable alternative comics such as Craig Thompson's Blankets and Alex Robinson 's Box Office Poison . In 2010 they branched out into unusual Japanese manga, with the release of AX:alternative manga (edited by Sean Michael Wilson). This 400-page collection received a high level of critical praise.",
  "A panel painting is a painting made on a flat panel of wood , either a single piece or a number of pieces joined together. Until canvas became the more popular support medium in the 16th century, panel painting was the normal method, when not painting directly onto a wall ( fresco ) or on vellum (used for miniatures in illuminated manuscripts ). Wood panels were also used for mounting vellum paintings.\n\nPanel painting is very old; it was a very prestigious medium in Greece and Rome, but only very few examples of ancient panel paintings have survived. A series of 6th century BC painted tablets from Pitsa ( Greece ) represent the oldest surviving Greek panel paintings. Most classical Greek paintings that were famous in their day seem to have been of a size comparable to smaller modern works – perhaps up to a half-length portrait size. However, for a generation in the second quarter of the fifth-century BC there was a movement, called the \"new painting\" and led by Polygnotus , for very large painted friezes , apparently painted on wood, decorating the interiors of public buildings with very large and complicated subjects containing numerous figures at least half life-size, and including battle scenes. We can only attempt to imagine what these looked like from some detailed literary descriptions and vase-paintings that appear to echo their compositions. \n\nThe first century BC to third century AD Fayum mummy portraits , preserved in the exceptionally dry conditions of Egypt , provide the bulk of surviving panel painting from the Imperial Roman period – about 900 face or bust portraits survive. The Severan Tondo , also from Roman Egypt (about 200 AD), is one of the handful of non-funerary Graeco-Roman specimens to survive. Wood has always been the normal support for the Icons of Byzantine art and the later Orthodox traditions, the earliest of which (all in Saint Catherine's Monastery ) date from the 5th or 6th centuries, and are the oldest panel paintings which seem to be of the highest contemporary quality. Encaustic and tempera are the two techniques used in antiquity. Encaustic largely ceased to be used after the early Byzantine icons.\n\nAlthough there seem from literary references to have been some panel paintings produced in Western Europe through the centuries between Late Antiquity and the Romanesque period, and Byzantine icons were imported, there are next to no survivals in an unaltered state. In the 12th century panel painting experienced a revival. Altarpieces seem to have begun to be used during the 11th century, with the possible exception of a few earlier examples. They became more common in the 13th century because of new liturgical practices—the priest and congregation were now on the same side of the altar, leaving the space behind the altar free for the display of a holy image—and thus altar decorations were in demand. The habit of placing decorated reliquaries of saints on or behind the altar, as well as the tradition of decorating the front of the altar with sculptures or textiles, preceded the first altarpieces. \n\nThe earliest forms of panel painting were dossals (altar backs), altar fronts and crucifixes . All were painted with religious images, commonly the Christ or the Virgin, with the saints appropriate to the dedication of the church, and the local town or diocese, or to the donor. Donor portraits including members of the donor's family are also often shown, usually kneeling to the side. They were for some time a cheaper alternative to the far more prestigious equivalents in metalwork, decorated with gems, enamels , and perhaps ivory figures, most of which have long been broken up for their valuable materials. Painted panels for altars are most numerous in Spain, especially Catalonia , which is explained by the poverty of the country at this time, as well as the lack of Reformation iconoclasm . \n\nThe 13th and 14th centuries in Italy were a great period of panel painting, mostly altarpieces or other religious works. However, it is estimated that of all the panel paintings produced there, 99.9 percent have been lost. The vast majority of Early Netherlandish paintings are on panel, and these include most of the earliest portraits , such as those by Jan van Eyck , and some other secular scenes. However, one of the earliest surviving oils on canvas is a French Madonna with angels of about 1410 in the Gemäldegalerie, Berlin , which is very early indeed for oil painting also. In these works the frame and panel are sometimes a single piece of wood, as with Portrait of a Man (Self Portrait?) by van Eyck ( National Gallery, London ), where the frame was also painted, including an inscription done illusionistically to resemble carving. \n\nBy the 15th century with the increased wealth of Europe, and later the appearance of humanism, and a changing attitude about the function of art and patronage, panel painting went in new directions. Secular art opened the way to the creation of chests, painted beds, birth trays and other furniture. Many such works are now detached and hung framed on walls in museums. Many double-sided wings of altarpieces (see picture at top) have also been sawn into two one-sided panels.\n\nCanvas took over from panel in Italy by the first half of the 16th century, a change led by Mantegna and the artists of Venice (which made the finest canvas at this point, for sails). In the Netherlands the change took about a century longer, and panel paintings remained common, especially in Northern Europe, even after the cheaper and more portable canvas had become the main support medium. The young Rubens and many other painters preferred it for the greater precision that could be achieved with a totally solid support, and many of his most important works also used it, even for paintings over four metres long in one dimension. His panels are of notoriously complicated construction, containing as many as seventeen pieces of wood ( Het Steen , National Gallery, London ). For smaller cabinet paintings , copper sheets (often old printmaking plates) were another rival support, from the end of the 16th century, used by many artists including Adam Elsheimer . Many Dutch painters of the Golden Age used panel for their small works, including Rembrandt on occasion. By the 18th century it had become unusual to paint on panel, except for small works to be inset into furniture, and the like. But, for example, The National Gallery in London has two Goya portraits on panel.\n\nMany other painting traditions also painted, and still paint, on wood, but the term is usually only used to refer to the Western tradition described above.\n\nThe technique is known to us through Cennino Cennini 's \"The Craftsman's Handbook\" ( Il libro dell' arte ) published in 1390, and other sources. It changed little over the centuries. It was a laborious and painstaking process:\n\nOnce the panel construction was complete, the design was laid out, usually in charcoal.\n\nThe usual ancient painting technique was encaustic , used at Al-Fayum and in the earliest surviving Byzantine icons, which are at the Saint Catherine's Monastery. This uses heated wax as the medium for the pigments.\n\nThis was replaced before the end of first millennium by tempera , which uses an egg-yolk medium. Using small brushes dipped in a mixture of pigment and egg-yolk, the paint was applied in very small, almost transparent, brushstrokes. Thin layers of paint would be used to create volumetric forms.\n\nBy the beginning of the 15th century, oil painting was developed. This was more tolerant, and allowed the exceptional detail of Early Netherlandish art. This used a very painstaking multi-layered technique, where the painting, or a particular part of it, had to be left for a couple of days for one layer to dry before the next was applied.\n\nWood panels, especially if kept with too little humidity, often warp and crack with age, and from the 19th century, when reliable techniques were developed, many have been transferred to canvas or modern board supports . This can result in damage to the paint layer, as historical transfer techniques were rather brutal.\n\nPaintings on wood panel that were expanded, such as Rubens' A View of Het Steen in the Early Morning (which consists of eighteen separate panels, seventeen added as the artist enlarged his composition), often suffer greatly over time. Each warps in its own way, tearing the overall piece apart at the seams. \n\nWood panel is now rather more useful to art historians than canvas, and in recent decades there has been great progress in extracting this information. Many fakes have been discovered and mistaken datings corrected. Specialists can identify the tree species used, which varied according to the area where the painting was made. Carbon-dating techniques can give an approximate date-range (typically to a range of about 20 years), and dendrochronology sequences have been developed for the main source areas of timber for panels. Italian paintings used local or sometimes Dalmatian wood, most often poplar , but including chestnut , walnut , oak and other woods. The Netherlands ran short of local timber early in the 15th century, and most Early Netherlandish masterpieces are Baltic oak , often Polish , cut north of Warsaw and shipped down the Vistula , across the Baltic to the Netherlands. Southern German painters often used pine , and mahogany imported into Europe was used by later painters, including examples by Rembrandt and Goya.\n\nIn theory, dendro-chronology gives an exact felling date, but in practice allowances have to be made for a seasoning period of several years, and a small panel may be from the centre of the tree, with no way of knowing how many rings outside the panel there were. So dendro-chronological conclusions tend to be expressed as a \"terminus post quem\" or an earliest possible date, with a tentative estimate of an actual date, that may be twenty or more years later.\n\nThe so-called Panel Paintings Initiative is a multi-year project in collaboration between the Getty Conservation Institute, the Getty Foundation , and the J. Paul Getty Museum . The Panel Paintings Initiative is a response to the growing recognition that significant collections of paintings on wood panels may be at risk in coming decades due to the waning numbers of conservators and craftspeople with the highly specialized skills required for the conservation of these complex works of art. \n\nArtists would typically use wood native to the region. Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528), for example, painted on poplar when he was in Venice and on oak when in the Netherlands and southern Germany. Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) used oak for his paintings in France; Hans Baldung Grien (1484/85–1545) and Hans Holbein (1497/98–1543) used oak while working in southern Germany and England. In the Middle Ages, spruce and lime were used in the Upper Rhine and often in Bavaria. Outside of the Rhineland, softwood (such as pinewood) was mainly used. Of a group of twenty Norwegian altar frontals from the Gothic period (1250–1350) fourteen were made of fir, two of oak, and four of pine (Kaland 1982). Large altars made in Denmark during the fifteenth century used oak for the figures as well as for the painted wings. Lime was popular with Albrecht Altdorfer (c. 1480–1538), Baldung Grien , Christoph Amberger (d. 1562), Dürer, and Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472–1553). Cranach often used beech wood—an unusual choice. In Northern Europe, poplar is very rarely found, but walnut and chestnut are not uncommon. In the northeast and south, coniferous trees such as spruce , and various types of fir , and pine have been used. Fir wood is shown to have been used in the Upper and Middle Rhine, Augsburg , Nuremberg , and Saxony . Pinewood was used mainly in Tirol and beech wood only in Saxony . However, in general, oak was the most common substrate used for panel making in the Low Countries , northern Germany, and the Rhineland around Cologne . In France, until the seventeenth century, most panels were made from oak, although a few made of walnut and poplar have been found.\n\nThe oak favored as a support by the painters of the northern school was, however, not always of local origin. In the seventeenth century about four thousand full-grown oak trees were needed to build a medium-sized merchant ship; thus, imported wood was necessary. Oak coming from Königsberg as well as Gdańsk is often found among works by Flemish and Dutch artists from the 15th through the 17th centuries; the origin can be established by the patterns of growth rings . In the last decade of the seventeenth century, Wilhelmus Beurs , a Dutch writer on painting techniques, considered oak to be the most useful wooden substrate on which to paint. However, exceptions are seen rather early in the seventeenth century: sometimes walnut, pearwood , cedarwood , or Indian woods were used. Mahogany was already in use by a number of painters during the first decades of the seventeenth century and was used often in the Netherlands in the nineteenth century. Even so, when canvas or copper was not used, the main oeuvre of the northern school was painted on oak panels. ",
  "Research is creative and systematic work undertaken to increase the stock of knowledge . It involves the collection, organization, and analysis of evidence to increase understanding of a topic, characterized by a particular attentiveness to controlling sources of bias and error . These activities are characterized by accounting and controlling for biases. A research project may be an expansion of past work in the field. To test the validity of instruments, procedures, or experiments, research may replicate elements of prior projects or the project as a whole.\n\nThe primary purposes of basic research (as opposed to applied research ) are documentation , discovery , interpretation , and the research and development (R&D) of methods and systems for the advancement of human knowledge. Approaches to research depend on epistemologies , which vary considerably both within and between humanities and sciences. There are several forms of research: scientific , humanities , artistic , economic, social , business, marketing , practitioner research , life, technological , etc. The scientific study of research practices is known as meta-research .\n\nA researcher is a person who conducts research, especially in order to discover new information or to reach a new understanding. In order to be a social researcher or a social scientist , one should have enormous knowledge of subjects related to social science that they are specialized in. Similarly, in order to be a natural science researcher, the person should have knowledge of fields related to natural science ( physics , chemistry , biology , astronomy , zoology and so on). Professional associations provide one pathway to mature in the research profession. \n\nThe word research is derived from the Middle French \" recherche \", which means \"to go about seeking\", the term itself being derived from the Old French term \"recerchier,\" a compound word from \"re-\" + \"cerchier\", or \"sercher\", meaning 'search'. The earliest recorded use of the term was in 1577. \n\nResearch has been defined in a number of different ways, and while there are similarities, there does not appear to be a single, all-encompassing definition that is embraced by all who engage in it.\n\nResearch, in its simplest terms, is searching for knowledge and searching for truth. In a formal sense, it is a systematic study of a problem attacked by a deliberately chosen strategy, which starts with choosing an approach to preparing a blueprint (design) and acting upon it in terms of designing research hypotheses, choosing methods and techniques, selecting or developing data collection tools, processing the data, interpretation, and ending with presenting solution(s) of the problem. \n\nAnother definition of research is given by John W. Creswell , who states that \"research is a process of steps used to collect and analyze information to increase our understanding of a topic or issue\". It consists of three steps: pose a question, collect data to answer the question, and present an answer to the question. [ page needed ]\n\nThe Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary defines research more generally to also include studying already existing knowledge: \"studious inquiry or examination; especially : investigation or experimentation aimed at the discovery and interpretation of facts, revision of accepted theories or laws in the light of new facts, or practical application of such new or revised theories or laws\". \n\nOriginal research , also called primary research , is research that is not exclusively based on a summary, review, or synthesis of earlier publications on the subject of research. This material is of a primary-source character. The purpose of the original research is to produce new knowledge rather than present the existing knowledge in a new form (e.g., summarized or classified). Original research can take various forms, depending on the discipline it pertains to. In experimental work, it typically involves direct or indirect observation of the researched subject(s), e.g., in the laboratory or in the field, documents the methodology , results, and conclusions of an experiment or set of experiments, or offers a novel interpretation of previous results. In analytical work, there are typically some new (for example) mathematical results produced or a new way of approaching an existing problem. In some subjects which do not typically carry out experimentation or analysis of this kind, the originality is in the particular way existing understanding is changed or re-interpreted based on the outcome of the work of the researcher . \n\nThe degree of originality of the research is among the major criteria for articles to be published in academic journals and usually established by means of peer review . Graduate students are commonly required to perform original research as part of a dissertation . \n\nScientific research is a systematic way of gathering data and harnessing curiosity . [ citation needed ] This research provides scientific information and theories for the explanation of the nature and the properties of the world. It makes practical applications possible. Scientific research may be funded by public authorities, charitable organizations, and private organizations. Scientific research can be subdivided by discipline .\n\nGenerally, research is understood to follow a certain structural process . Though the order may vary depending on the subject matter and researcher, the following steps are usually part of most formal research, both basic and applied:\n\nA common misconception is that a hypothesis will be proven (see, rather, null hypothesis ). Generally, a hypothesis is used to make predictions that can be tested by observing the outcome of an experiment. If the outcome is inconsistent with the hypothesis, then the hypothesis is rejected (see falsifiability ). However, if the outcome is consistent with the hypothesis, the experiment is said to support the hypothesis. This careful language is used because researchers recognize that alternative hypotheses may also be consistent with the observations. In this sense, a hypothesis can never be proven, but rather only supported by surviving rounds of scientific testing and, eventually, becoming widely thought of as true.\n\nA useful hypothesis allows prediction and within the accuracy of observation of the time, the prediction will be verified. As the accuracy of observation improves with time, the hypothesis may no longer provide an accurate prediction. In this case, a new hypothesis will arise to challenge the old, and to the extent that the new hypothesis makes more accurate predictions than the old, the new will supplant it. Researchers can also use a null hypothesis, which states no relationship or difference between the independent or dependent variables.\n\nResearch in the humanities involves different methods such as for example hermeneutics and semiotics . Humanities scholars usually do not search for the ultimate correct answer to a question, but instead, explore the issues and details that surround it. Context is always important, and context can be social, historical, political, cultural, or ethnic. An example of research in the humanities is historical research, which is embodied in historical method . Historians use primary sources and other evidence to systematically investigate a topic, and then to write histories in the form of accounts of the past. Other studies aim to merely examine the occurrence of behaviours in societies and communities, without particularly looking for reasons or motivations to explain these. These studies may be qualitative or quantitative, and can use a variety of approaches, such as queer theory or feminist theory. \n\nArtistic research , also seen as 'practice-based research', can take form when creative works are considered both the research and the object of research itself. It is the debatable body of thought which offers an alternative to purely scientific methods in research in its search for knowledge and truth.\n\nThe controversial trend of artistic teaching becoming more academics-oriented is leading to artistic research being accepted as the primary mode of enquiry in art as in the case of other disciplines. One of the characteristics of artistic research is that it must accept subjectivity as opposed to the classical scientific methods. As such, it is similar to the social sciences in using qualitative research and intersubjectivity as tools to apply measurement and critical analysis. \n\nArtistic research has been defined by the School of Dance and Circus (Dans och Cirkushögskolan, DOCH), Stockholm in the following manner – \"Artistic research is to investigate and test with the purpose of gaining knowledge within and for our artistic disciplines. It is based on artistic practices, methods, and criticality. Through presented documentation, the insights gained shall be placed in a context.\" Artistic research aims to enhance knowledge and understanding with presentation of the arts. A simpler understanding by Julian Klein defines artistic research as any kind of research employing the artistic mode of perception. For a survey of the central problematics of today's artistic research, see Giaco Schiesser . \n\nAccording to artist Hakan Topal , in artistic research, \"perhaps more so than other disciplines, intuition is utilized as a method to identify a wide range of new and unexpected productive modalities\". Most writers, whether of fiction or non-fiction books, also have to do research to support their creative work. This may be factual, historical, or background research. Background research could include, for example, geographical or procedural research. \n\nThe Society for Artistic Research (SAR) publishes the triannual Journal for Artistic Research ( JAR ), an international, online, open access , and peer-reviewed journal for the identification, publication, and dissemination of artistic research and its methodologies, from all arts disciplines and it runs the Research Catalogue (RC), a searchable, documentary database of artistic research, to which anyone can contribute.\n\nPatricia Leavy addresses eight arts-based research (ABR) genres: narrative inquiry, fiction-based research, poetry, music, dance, theatre, film, and visual art. \n\nIn 2016, the European League of Institutes of the Arts launched The Florence Principles' on the Doctorate in the Arts . The Florence Principles relating to the Salzburg Principles and the Salzburg Recommendations of the European University Association name seven points of attention to specify the Doctorate / PhD in the Arts compared to a scientific doctorate / PhD. The Florence Principles have been endorsed and are supported also by AEC , CILECT , CUMULUS and SAR .\n\nThe historical method comprises the techniques and guidelines by which historians use historical sources and other evidence to research and then to write history. There are various history guidelines that are commonly used by historians in their work, under the headings of external criticism, internal criticism, and synthesis. This includes lower criticism and sensual criticism. Though items may vary depending on the subject matter and researcher, the following concepts are part of most formal historical research: \n\nResearch is often conducted using the hourglass model structure of research. The hourglass model starts with a broad spectrum for research, focusing in on the required information through the method of the project (like the neck of the hourglass), then expands the research in the form of discussion and results. The major steps in conducting research are: \n\nThe steps generally represent the overall process; however, they should be viewed as an ever-changing iterative process rather than a fixed set of steps. Most research begins with a general statement of the problem, or rather, the purpose for engaging in the study. The literature review identifies flaws or holes in previous research which provides justification for the study. Often, a literature review is conducted in a given subject area before a research question is identified. A gap in the current literature, as identified by a researcher, then engenders a research question. The research question may be parallel to the hypothesis . The hypothesis is the supposition to be tested. The researcher(s) collects data to test the hypothesis. The researcher(s) then analyzes and interprets the data via a variety of statistical methods, engaging in what is known as empirical research . The results of the data analysis in rejecting or failing to reject the null hypothesis are then reported and evaluated. At the end, the researcher may discuss avenues for further research . However, some researchers advocate for the reverse approach: starting with articulating findings and discussion of them, moving \"up\" to identification of a research problem that emerges in the findings and literature review. The reverse approach is justified by the transactional nature of the research endeavor where research inquiry, research questions, research method, relevant research literature, and so on are not fully known until the findings have fully emerged and been interpreted.\n\nRudolph Rummel says, \"... no researcher should accept any one or two tests as definitive. It is only when a range of tests are consistent over many kinds of data, researchers, and methods can one have confidence in the results.\" \n\nPlato in Meno talks about an inherent difficulty, if not a paradox, of doing research that can be paraphrased in the following way, \"If you know what you're searching for, why do you search for it?! [i.e., you have already found it] If you don't know what you're searching for, what are you searching for?!\" \n\nThe goal of the research process is to produce new knowledge or deepen understanding of a topic or issue. This process takes three main forms (although, as previously discussed, the boundaries between them may be obscure):\n\nThere are two major types of empirical research design: qualitative research and quantitative research. Researchers choose qualitative or quantitative methods according to the nature of the research topic they want to investigate and the research questions they aim to answer:\n\nQualitative research Qualitative research refers to much more subjective non-quantitative, use different methods of collecting data, analyzing data, interpreting data for meanings, definitions, characteristics, symbols metaphors of things. Qualitative research further classified into the following types: Ethnography: This research mainly focus on culture of group of people which includes share attributes, language, practices, structure, value, norms and material things, evaluate human lifestyle. Ethno: people, Grapho: to write, this disciple may include ethnic groups, ethno genesis, composition, resettlement and social welfare characteristics. Phenomenology : It is very powerful strategy for demonstrating methodology to health professions education as well as best suited for exploring challenging problems in health professions educations. In addition, PMP researcher Mandy Sha argued that a project management approach is necessary to control the scope, schedule, and cost related to qualitative research design, participant recruitment, data collection, reporting, as well as stakeholder engagement . \n\nQuantitative research Quantitative research involves systematic empirical investigation of quantitative properties and phenomena and their relationships, by asking a narrow question and collecting numerical data to analyze it utilizing statistical methods. The quantitative research designs are experimental, correlational, and survey (or descriptive). Statistics derived from quantitative research can be used to establish the existence of associative or causal relationships between variables. Quantitative research is linked with the philosophical and theoretical stance of positivism .\n\nThe quantitative data collection methods rely on random sampling and structured data collection instruments that fit diverse experiences into predetermined response categories. These methods produce results that can be summarized, compared, and generalized to larger populations if the data are collected using proper sampling and data collection strategies. Quantitative research is concerned with testing hypotheses derived from theory or being able to estimate the size of a phenomenon of interest. \n\nIf the research question is about people, participants may be randomly assigned to different treatments (this is the only way that a quantitative study can be considered a true experiment). [ citation needed ] If this is not feasible, the researcher may collect data on participant and situational characteristics to statistically control for their influence on the dependent, or outcome, variable. If the intent is to generalize from the research participants to a larger population, the researcher will employ probability sampling to select participants. \n\nIn either qualitative or quantitative research, the researcher(s) may collect primary or secondary data. Primary data is data collected specifically for the research, such as through interviews or questionnaires. Secondary data is data that already exists, such as census data, which can be re-used for the research. It is good ethical research practice to use secondary data wherever possible. \n\nMixed-method research, i.e. research that includes qualitative and quantitative elements, using both primary and secondary data, is becoming more common. This method has benefits that using one method alone cannot offer. For example, a researcher may choose to conduct a qualitative study and follow it up with a quantitative study to gain additional insights. \n\nBig data has brought big impacts on research methods so that now many researchers do not put much effort into data collection; furthermore, methods to analyze easily available huge amounts of data have also been developed.\n\nNon-empirical research Non-empirical ( theoretical ) research is an approach that involves the development of theory as opposed to using observation and experimentation. As such, non-empirical research seeks solutions to problems using existing knowledge as its source. This, however, does not mean that new ideas and innovations cannot be found within the pool of existing and established knowledge. Non-empirical research is not an absolute alternative to empirical research because they may be used together to strengthen a research approach. Neither one is less effective than the other since they have their particular purpose in science. Typically empirical research produces observations that need to be explained; then theoretical research tries to explain them, and in so doing generates empirically testable hypotheses; these hypotheses are then tested empirically, giving more observations that may need further explanation; and so on. See Scientific method .\n\nA simple example of a non-empirical task is the prototyping of a new drug using a differentiated application of existing knowledge; another is the development of a business process in the form of a flow chart and texts where all the ingredients are from established knowledge. Much of cosmological research is theoretical in nature. Mathematics research does not rely on externally available data; rather, it seeks to prove theorems about mathematical objects .\n\nResearch ethics is a discipline within the study of applied ethics . Its scope ranges from general scientific integrity and misconduct to the treatment of human and animal subjects. The social responsibilities of scientists and researchers are not traditionally included and are less well defined.\n\nThe discipline is most developed in medical research . Beyond the issues of falsification, fabrication, and plagiarism that arise in every scientific field, research design in human subject research and animal testing are the areas that raise ethical questions most often.\n\nThe list of historic cases includes many large-scale violations and crimes against humanity such as Nazi human experimentation and the Tuskegee syphilis experiment which led to international codes of research ethics. No approach has been universally accepted, but typically cited codes are the 1947 Nuremberg Code , the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki , and the 1978 Belmont Report .\n\nToday, research ethics committees , such as those of the US , UK , and EU , govern and oversee the responsible conduct of research. One major goal being to reduce questionable research practices .\n\nMetascience is the study of research through the use of research methods. Also known as \"research on research\", it aims to reduce waste and increase the quality of research in all fields. Meta-research concerns itself with the detection of bias, methodological flaws, and other errors and inefficiencies. Among the finding of meta-research is a low rates of reproducibility across a large number of fields. \n\nIn many disciplines, Western methods of conducting research are predominant. Researchers are overwhelmingly taught Western methods of data collection and study. The increasing participation of indigenous peoples as researchers has brought increased attention to the scientific lacuna in culturally sensitive methods of data collection. Western methods of data collection may not be the most accurate or relevant for research on non-Western societies. For example, \" Hua Oranga \" was created as a criterion for psychological evaluation in Māori populations, and is based on dimensions of mental health important to the Māori people – \"taha wairua (the spiritual dimension), taha hinengaro (the mental dimension), taha tinana (the physical dimension), and taha whanau (the family dimension)\". \n\nEven though Western dominance seems to be prominent in research, some scholars, such as Simon Marginson , argue for \"the need [for] a plural university world\". Marginson argues that the East Asian Confucian model could take over the Western model.\n\nThis could be due to changes in funding for research both in the East and the West. Focused on emphasizing educational achievement, East Asian cultures, mainly in China and South Korea, have encouraged the increase of funding for research expansion. In contrast, in the Western academic world, notably in the United Kingdom as well as in some state governments in the United States, funding cuts for university research have occurred, which some [ who? ] say may lead to the future decline of Western dominance in research.\n\nResearch is often biased in the languages that are preferred ( linguicism ) and the geographic locations where research occurs.\nPeriphery scholars face the challenges of exclusion and linguicism in research and academic publication. As the great majority of mainstream academic journals are written in English, multilingual periphery scholars often must translate their work to be accepted to elite Western-dominated journals. Multilingual scholars' influences from their native communicative styles can be assumed to be incompetence instead of difference. Patterns of geographic bias also show a relationship with linguicism: countries whose official languages are French or Arabic are far less likely to be the focus of single-country studies than countries with different official languages. Within Africa, English-speaking countries are more represented than other countries. \n\nGeneralization is the process of more broadly applying the valid results of one study. Studies with a narrow scope can result in a lack of generalizability, meaning that the results may not be applicable to other populations or regions. In comparative politics, this can result from using a single-country study, rather than a study design that uses data from multiple countries. Despite the issue of generalizability, single-country studies have risen in prevalence since the late 2000s. \n\nFor comparative politics, Western countries are over-represented in single-country studies, with heavy emphasis on Western Europe, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. Since 2000, Latin American countries have become more popular in single-country studies. In contrast, countries in Oceania and the Caribbean are the focus of very few studies. \n\nPeer review is a form of self-regulation by qualified members of a profession within the relevant field. Peer review methods are employed to maintain standards of quality, improve performance, and provide credibility. In academia, scholarly peer review is often used to determine an academic paper's suitability for publication. Usually, the peer review process involves experts in the same field who are consulted by editors to give a review of the scholarly works produced by a colleague of theirs from an unbiased and impartial point of view, and this is usually done free of charge. The tradition of peer reviews being done for free has however brought many pitfalls which are also indicative of why most peer reviewers decline many invitations to review. It was observed that publications from periphery countries rarely rise to the same elite status as those of North America and Europe. \n\nThe open research , open science and open access movements assume that all information generally deemed useful should be free and belongs to a \"public domain\", that of \"humanity\". This idea gained prevalence as a result of Western colonial history and ignores alternative conceptions of knowledge circulation. For instance, most indigenous communities consider that access to certain information proper to the group should be determined by relationships. There is alleged to be a double standard in the Western knowledge system. On the one hand, \"digital right management\" used to restrict access to personal information on social networking platforms is celebrated as a protection of privacy, while simultaneously when similar functions are used by cultural groups (i.e. indigenous communities) this is denounced as \"access control\" and reprehended as censorship. \n\nIn several national and private academic systems, the professionalisation of research has resulted in formal job titles.\n\nIn present-day Russia, and some other countries of the former Soviet Union , the term researcher (Russian: Научный сотрудник , nauchny sotrudnik ) has been used both as a generic term for a person who has been carrying out scientific research, and as a job position within the frameworks of the Academy of Sciences , universities, and in other research-oriented establishments.\n\nThe following ranks are known:\n\nAcademic publishing is a system that is necessary for academic scholars to peer review the work and make it available for a wider audience. The system varies widely by field and is also always changing, if often slowly. Most academic work is published in journal article or book form. There is also a large body of research that exists in either a thesis or dissertation form. These forms of research can be found in databases explicitly for theses and dissertations. In publishing, STM publishing is an abbreviation for academic publications in science, technology, and medicine.\nMost established academic fields have their own scientific journals and other outlets for publication, though many academic journals are somewhat interdisciplinary, and publish work from several distinct fields or subfields. The kinds of publications that are accepted as contributions of knowledge or research vary greatly between fields, from the print to the electronic format. A study suggests that researchers should not give great consideration to findings that are not replicated frequently. It has also been suggested that all published studies should be subjected to some measure for assessing the validity or reliability of its procedures to prevent the publication of unproven findings. Business models are different in the electronic environment. Since about the early 1990s, licensing of electronic resources, particularly journals, has been very common. Presently, a major trend, particularly with respect to scholarly journals, is open access . There are two main forms of open access: open access publishing, in which the articles or the whole journal is freely available from the time of publication, and self-archiving , where the author makes a copy of their own work freely available on the web.\n\nMost funding for scientific research comes from three major sources: corporate research and development departments; private foundations ; and government research councils such as the National Institutes of Health in the US and the Medical Research Council in the UK. These are managed primarily through universities and in some cases through military contractors. Many senior researchers (such as group leaders) spend a significant amount of their time applying for grants for research funds. These grants are necessary not only for researchers to carry out their research but also as a source of merit. The Social Psychology Network provides a comprehensive list of U.S. Government and private foundation funding sources.\n\nThe total number of researchers (full-time equivalents) per million inhabitants for individual countries is shown in the following table.\n\nResearch expenditure by type of research as a share of GDP for individual countries is shown in the following table.",
  "Shu'ubiyya ( Arabic : الشعوبية ) was a literary-political movement which opposed the privileged status of Arabs within the Muslim community and the Arabization campaigns particularly by the Umayyads . The vast majority of the Shu'ubis were Persian. The movement was first seriously studied by Ignaz Goldziher (d. 1921) in the first volume of his work Muslim Studies . \n\nThe name of the movement is derived from the Qur'anic use of the word for \"nations\" or \"peoples\", šuʿūb . The verse (49:13)\n\n:يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ وَأُنثَى وَجَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوباً وَ قَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِندَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ O mankind, indeed We have created you from male and female and made you peoples and tribes that you may know one another. Indeed, the most noble of you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous of you. Indeed, Allah is Knowing and Acquainted.(translated by Saheeh International )\n\nWhen used as a reference to a specific movement, the term refers to a response by Persian Muslims to the failed attempt of Arabization of Iran in the 9th and 10th centuries. It was primarily concerned with preserving Persian culture and protecting Persian identity. \n\nIn the late 8th and early 9th centuries, there was a resurgence of Persian national identity. This came mainly through the patronage of the Iranian Samanid dynasty. The movement left substantial records in the form of Persian literature and new forms of poetry. Most of those behind the movement were Persian, but references to Egyptians , Berbers and Arameans are attested. \n\nTwo centuries after the end of the Shu'ubiyyah movement in the east, another form of the movement came about in Islamic Iberia and was controlled by Muwallad (mixed Arab and Iberian Muslims). It was fueled mainly by the Berbers , but included many European cultural groups as well including Galicians , Catalans (known by that time as Franks ), Cantabrians , and Basques . A notable example of Shu'ubi literature is the epistle ( risala ) of the Andalusian poet Ibn Gharsiya (García). \n\nIbn Qutaybah (a Persian scholar) and the Arab writer and scholar Al-Jahiz are known to have written works denouncing Shu'ubist thoughts.\n\nIn 1966, Sami Hanna and G.H. Gardner wrote an article \"Al-Shu‘ubiyah Updated\" in the Middle East Journal. The Dutch university professor Leonard C. Biegel, in his 1972 book Minorities in the Middle East: Their significance as political factor in the Arab World , coined from the article of Hanna and Gardner the term Neo-Shu'ubiyah to name the modern attempts of alternative non-Arab and often non-Muslim nationalisms in the Middle East, e.g. Assyrian nationalism , Kurdish nationalism , Berberism , Coptic nationalism , Pharaonism , Phoenicianism . In a 1984 article, Daniel Dishon and Bruce Maddi-Weitzmann use the same neologism, Neo-Shu'ubiyya . ",
  "Singing is the art of creating music with the voice . It is the oldest form of musical expression, and the human voice can be considered the first musical instrument. The definition of singing varies across sources. Some sources define singing as the act of creating musical sounds with the voice . Other common definitions include \"the utterance of words or sounds in tuneful succession\" or \"the production of musical tones by means of the human voice\". \n\nA person whose profession is singing is called a singer or a vocalist (in jazz or popular music ). Singers perform music ( arias , recitatives , songs , etc.) that can be sung with or without accompaniment by musical instruments . Singing is often done in an ensemble of musicians, such as a choir . Singers may perform as soloists or accompanied by anything from a single instrument (as in art songs or some jazz styles ) up to a symphony orchestra or big band . Many styles of singing exist throughout the world.\n\nSinging can be formal or informal, arranged, or improvised. It may be done as a form of religious devotion, as a hobby, as a source of pleasure, comfort, as part of a ritual, during music education or as a profession. Excellence in singing requires time, dedication, instruction, and regular practice . If practice is done regularly then the sounds can become clearer and stronger. Professional singers usually build their careers around one specific musical genre , such as classical or rock , although there are singers with crossover success (singing in more than one genre). Professional singers usually take voice training provided by voice teachers or vocal coaches throughout their careers.\n\nSinging should not be confused with rapping as they are not the same. According to music scholar and rap historian Martin E. Connor, \"Rap is often defined by its very opposition to singing.\" While also a form of vocal music , rap differs from singing in that it does not engage with tonality in the same way and does not require pitch accuracy. Like singing, rap does use rhythm in connection to words but these are spoken rather than sung on specific pitches. Grove Music Online states that \"Within the historical context of popular music in the United States, rap can be seen as an alternative to singing that could connect directly with stylistic speech practices in African American English.\" However, some rap artists do employ singing as well as rapping in their music; using the switch between the rhythmic speech of rapping and the sung pitches of singing as a striking contrast to grab the attention of the listener. \n\nIn its physical aspect, singing has a well-defined technique that depends on the use of the lungs, which act as an air supply or bellows ; on the larynx , which acts as a reed or vibrator ; on the chest , head cavities and the skeleton, which have the function of an amplifier , as the tube in a wind instrument ; and on the tongue , which together with the palate , teeth , and lips articulate and impose consonants and vowels on the amplified sound. Though these four mechanisms function independently, they are nevertheless coordinated in the establishment of a vocal technique and are made to interact upon one another. During passive breathing, air is inhaled with the diaphragm while exhalation occurs without any effort. Exhalation may be aided by the abdominal , internal intercostal and lower pelvis/pelvic muscles. Inhalation is aided by use of external intercostals , scalenes , and sternocleidomastoid muscles . The pitch is altered with the vocal cords . With the lips closed, this is called humming .\n\nThe sound of each individual's singing voice is entirely unique not only because of the actual shape and size of an individual's vocal cords , but also due to the size and shape of the rest of that person's body. Humans have vocal folds which can loosen, tighten, or change their thickness, and over which breath can be transferred at varying pressures. The shape of the chest and neck , the position of the tongue , and the tightness of otherwise unrelated muscles can be altered. Any one of these actions results in a change in pitch , volume ( loudness ), timbre , or tone of the sound produced. Sound also resonates within different parts of the body and an individual's size and bone structure can affect the sound produced by an individual.\n\nSingers can also learn to project sound in certain ways so that it resonates better within their vocal tract. This is known as vocal resonation . Another major influence on vocal sound and production is the function of the larynx which people can manipulate in different ways to produce different sounds. These different kinds of laryngeal function are described as different kinds of vocal registers . The primary method for singers to accomplish this is through the use of the singer's formant ; which has been shown to match particularly well to the most sensitive part of the ear 's frequency range. \n\nIt has also been shown that a more powerful voice may be achieved with a fatter and fluid-like vocal fold mucosa. The more pliable the mucosa, the more efficient the transfer of energy from the airflow to the vocal folds. \n\nIn European classical music and opera , voices are treated like musical instruments . Composers who write vocal music must have an understanding of the skills, talents, and vocal properties of singers. Voice classification is the process by which human singing voices are evaluated and are thereby designated into voice types . These qualities include but are not limited to vocal range , vocal weight , vocal tessitura , vocal timbre , and vocal transition points such as breaks and lifts within the voice. Other considerations are physical characteristics, speech level, scientific testing, and vocal registration . The science behind voice classification developed within European classical music has been slow in adapting to more modern forms of singing. Voice classification is often used within opera to associate possible roles with potential voices. There are currently several different systems in use within classical music including the German Fach system and the choral music system among many others. No system is universally applied or accepted. \n\nHowever, most classical music systems acknowledge seven different major voice categories. Women are typically divided into three groups: soprano , mezzo-soprano , and contralto . Men are usually divided into four groups: countertenor , tenor , baritone , and bass . With regard to voices of pre-pubescent children, an eighth term, treble , can be applied. Within each of these major categories, several sub-categories identify specific vocal qualities like coloratura facility and vocal weight to differentiate between voices. \n\nWithin choral music , singers' voices are divided solely on the basis of vocal range. Choral music most commonly divides vocal parts into high and low voices within each sex (SATB, or soprano, alto, tenor, and bass). As a result, the typical choral situation gives many opportunities for misclassification to occur. Since most people have medium voices, they must be assigned to a part that is either too high or too low for them; the mezzo-soprano must sing soprano or alto and the baritone must sing tenor or bass. Either option can present problems for the singer, but for most singers, there are fewer dangers in singing too low than in singing too high. \n\nWithin contemporary forms of music (sometimes referred to as contemporary commercial music ), singers are classified by the style of music they sing, such as jazz, pop, blues, soul, country, folk, and rock styles. There is currently no authoritative voice classification system within non-classical music. Attempts have been made to adopt classical voice type terms to other forms of singing but such attempts have been met with controversy. The development of voice categorizations were made with the understanding that the singer would be using classical vocal technique within a specified range using unamplified (no microphones) vocal production. Since contemporary musicians use different vocal techniques and microphones and are not forced to fit into a specific vocal role, applying such terms as soprano, tenor, baritone, etc. can be misleading or even inaccurate. \n\nVocal registration refers to the system of vocal registers within the voice. A register in the voice is a particular series of tones, produced in the same vibratory pattern of the vocal folds , and possessing the same quality. Registers originate in laryngeal function. They occur because the vocal folds are capable of producing several different vibratory patterns. Each of these vibratory patterns appears within a particular range of pitches and produces certain characteristic sounds. The occurrence of registers has also been attributed to the effects of the acoustic interaction between the vocal fold oscillation and the vocal tract. The term \"register\" can be somewhat confusing as it encompasses several aspects of the voice. The term register can be used to refer to any of the following: \n\nIn linguistics , a register language is a language which combines tone and vowel phonation into a single phonological system. Within speech pathology , the term vocal register has three constituent elements: a certain vibratory pattern of the vocal folds, a certain series of pitches, and a certain type of sound. Speech pathologists identify four vocal registers based on the physiology of laryngeal function: the vocal fry register , the modal register , the falsetto register , and the whistle register . This view is also adopted by many vocal pedagogues. \n\nVocal resonation is the process by which the basic product of phonation is enhanced in timbre or intensity by the air-filled cavities through which it passes on its way to the outside air. Various terms related to the resonation process include amplification, enrichment, enlargement, improvement, intensification, and prolongation, although in strictly scientific usage acoustic authorities would question most of them. The main point to be drawn from these terms by a singer or speaker is that the result of resonation is, or should be, to make a better sound. There are seven areas that may be listed as possible vocal resonators. In sequence from the lowest within the body to the highest, these areas are the chest , the tracheal tree , the larynx itself, the pharynx , the oral cavity , the nasal cavity , and the sinuses . \n\nChest voice and head voice are terms used within vocal music . The use of these terms varies widely within vocal pedagogical circles and there is currently no one consistent opinion among vocal music professionals in regards to these terms. Chest voice can be used in relation to a particular part of the vocal range or type of vocal register ; a vocal resonance area; or a specific vocal timbre. Head voice can be used in relation to a particular part of the vocal range or type of vocal register or a vocal resonance area. In Men, the head voice is commonly referred to as the falsetto. The transition from and combination of chest voice and head voice is referred to as vocal mix or vocal mixing in the singer's performance. Vocal mixing can be inflected in specific modalities of artists who may concentrate on smooth transitions between chest voice and head voice, and those who may use a \"flip\" to describe the sudden transition from chest voice to head voice for artistic reasons and enhancement of vocal performances.\n\nThe first recorded mention of the terms chest voice and head voice was around the 13th century when it was distinguished from the \"throat voice\" (pectoris, guttoris, capitis—at this time it is likely that head voice referred to the falsetto register ) by the writers Johannes de Garlandia and Jerome of Moravia . The terms were later adopted within bel canto , the Italian opera singing method, where chest voice was identified as the lowest and head voice the highest of three vocal registers: the chest, passagio , and head registers. This approach is still taught by some vocal pedagogists today. Another current popular approach that is based on the bel canto model is to divide both men and women's voices into three registers. Men's voices are divided into \"chest register\", \"head register\", and \"falsetto register\" and woman's voices into \"chest register\", \"middle register\", and \"head register\". Such pedagogists teach that the head register is a vocal technique used in singing to describe the resonance felt in the singer's head. \n\nHowever, as knowledge of physiology has increased over the past two hundred years, so has the understanding of the physical process of singing and vocal production. As a result, many vocal pedagogists, such as Ralph Appelman at Indiana University and William Vennard at the University of Southern California , have redefined or even abandoned the use of the terms chest voice and head voice. In particular, the use of the terms chest register and head register have become controversial since vocal registration is more commonly seen today as a product of laryngeal function that is unrelated to the physiology of the chest, lungs, and head. For this reason, many vocal pedagogists argue that it is meaningless to speak of registers being produced in the chest or head. They argue that the vibratory sensations which are felt in these areas are resonance phenomena and should be described in terms related to vocal resonance , not to registers. These vocal pedagogists prefer the terms chest voice and head voice over the term register. This view believes that the problems which people identify as register problems are really problems of resonance adjustment. This view is also in alignment with the views of other academic fields that study vocal registration including speech pathology , phonetics , and linguistics . Although both methods are still in use, current vocal pedagogical practice tends to adopt the newer more scientific view. Also, some vocal pedagogists take ideas from both viewpoints. \n\nThe contemporary use of the term chest voice often refers to a specific kind of vocal coloration or vocal timbre. In classical singing, its use is limited entirely to the lower part of the modal register or normal voice. Within other forms of singing, chest voice is often applied throughout the modal register. Chest timbre can add a wonderful array of sounds to a singer's vocal interpretive palette. However, the use of an overly strong chest voice in the higher registers in an attempt to hit higher notes in the chest can lead to forcing. Forcing can lead consequently to vocal deterioration. \n\nPassaggio ( Italian pronunciation: [pasˈsaddʒo] ) is a term used in classical singing to describe the transition area between the vocal registers . The passaggi (plural) of the voice lie between the different vocal registers, such as the chest voice , where any singer can produce a powerful sound, the middle voice, and the head voice , where a penetrating sound is accessible, but usually only through vocal training. The historic Italian school of singing describes a primo passaggio and a secondo passaggio connected through a zona di passaggio in the male voice and a primo passaggio and secondo passaggio in the female voice. A major goal of classical voice training in classical styles is to maintain an even timbre throughout the passaggio. Through proper training, it is possible to produce a resonant and powerful sound.\n\nOne cannot adequately discuss the vocal passaggio without having a basic understanding of the different vocal registers. In his book The Principles of Voice Production , Ingo Titze states, \"The term register has been used to describe perceptually distinct regions of vocal quality that can be maintained over some ranges of pitch and loudness.\" Discrepancies in terminology exist between different fields of vocal study, such as teachers and singers, researchers, and clinicians. As Marilee David points out, \"Voice scientists see registration primarily as acoustic events.\" For singers, it is more common to explain registration events based on the physical sensations they feel when singing. Titze also explains that there are discrepancies in the terminology used to talk about vocal registration between speech pathologists and singing teachers. Since this article discusses the passaggio , which is a term used by classical singers, the registers will be discussed as they are in the field of singing rather than speech pathology and science.\n\nThe three main registers, described as head, middle (mixed), and chest voice, are described as having a rich timbre, because of the overtones due to the sympathetic resonance within the human body. Their names are derived from the area in which the singer feels these resonant vibration in the body. The chest register, more commonly referred to as the chest voice, is the lowest of the registers. When singing in the chest voice the singer feels sympathetic vibration in the chest. This is the register that people most commonly use while speaking. The middle voice falls in between the chest voice and head voice. The head register, or the head voice, is the highest of the main vocal registers. When singing in the head voice, the singer may feel sympathetic vibration occurring in the face or another part of the head. Where these registers lie in the voice is dependent on sex and the voice type within each sex. \n\nThere are an additional two registers called falsetto and flageolet register, which lie above their head register. Training is often required to access the pitches within these registers. Men and women with lower voices rarely sing in these registers. Lower-voiced women in particular receive very little if any training in the flageolet register. Men have one more additional register called the strohbass , which lies below the chest voice. Singing in this register is hard on the vocal cords, and therefore, is hardly ever used. \n\nVocal pedagogy is the study of the teaching of singing. The art and science of vocal pedagogy has a long history that began in Ancient Greece and continues to develop and change today. Professions that practice the art and science of vocal pedagogy include vocal coaches , choral directors , vocal music educators , opera directors , and other teachers of singing.\n\nVocal pedagogy concepts are a part of developing proper vocal technique . Typical areas of study include the following: \n\nSinging when done with proper vocal technique is an integrated and coordinated act that effectively coordinates the physical processes of singing. There are four physical processes involved in producing vocal sound: respiration , phonation , resonation , and articulation . These processes occur in the following sequence:\n\nAlthough these four processes are often considered separately when studied, in actual practice, they merge into one coordinated function. With an effective singer or speaker, one should rarely be reminded of the process involved as their mind and body are so coordinated that one only perceives the resulting unified function. Many vocal problems result from a lack of coordination within this process. \n\nSince singing is a coordinated act, it is difficult to discuss any of the individual technical areas and processes without relating them to others. For example, phonation only comes into perspective when it is connected with respiration; the articulators affect resonance; the resonators affect the vocal folds; the vocal folds affect breath control; and so forth. Vocal problems are often a result of a breakdown in one part of this coordinated process which causes voice teachers to frequently focus intensively on one area of the process with their student until that issue is resolved. However, some areas of the art of singing are so much the result of coordinated functions that it is hard to discuss them under a traditional heading like phonation, resonation, articulation, or respiration.\n\nOnce the voice student has become aware of the physical processes that make up the act of singing and of how those processes function, the student begins the task of trying to coordinate them. Inevitably, students and teachers will become more concerned with one area of the technique than another. The various processes may progress at different rates, with a resulting imbalance or lack of coordination. The areas of vocal technique which seem to depend most strongly on the student's ability to coordinate various functions are: \n\nSinging is a skill that requires highly developed muscle reflexes. Singing does not require much muscle strength but it does require a high degree of muscle coordination. Individuals can develop their voices further through the careful and systematic practice of both songs and vocal exercises. Vocal exercises have several purposes, including warming up the voice; extending the vocal range; \"lining up\" the voice horizontally and vertically; and acquiring vocal techniques such as legato, staccato, control of dynamics, rapid figurations, learning to sing wide intervals comfortably, singing trills, singing melismas and correcting vocal faults.\n\nVocal pedagogists instruct their students to exercise their voices in an intelligent manner. Singers should be thinking constantly about the kind of sound they are making and the kind of sensations they are feeling while they are singing. \n\nLearning to sing is an activity that benefits from the involvement of an instructor. A singer does not hear the same sounds inside his or her head that others hear outside. Therefore, having a guide who can tell a student what kinds of sounds he or she is producing guides a singer to understand which of the internal sounds correspond to the desired sounds required by the style of singing the student aims to re-create. [ citation needed ]\n\nAn important goal of vocal development is to learn to sing to the natural limits of one's vocal range without any obvious or distracting changes of quality or technique. Vocal pedagogists teach that a singer can only achieve this goal when all of the physical processes involved in singing (such as laryngeal action, breath support, resonance adjustment, and articulatory movement) are effectively working together. Most vocal pedagogists believe in coordinating these processes by (1) establishing good vocal habits in the most comfortable tessitura of the voice, and then (2) slowly expanding the range. \n\nThere are three factors that significantly affect the ability to sing higher or lower:\n\nMcKinney says, \"These three factors can be expressed in three basic rules: (1) As you sing higher, you must use more energy; as you sing lower, you must use less. (2) As you sing higher, you must use more space; as you sing lower, you must use less. (3) As you sing higher, you must use more depth; as you sing lower, you must use less.\" \n\nThe singing process functions best when certain physical conditions of the body are put in place. The ability to move air in and out of the body freely and to obtain the needed quantity of air can be seriously affected by the posture of the various parts of the breathing mechanism. A sunken chest position will limit the capacity of the lungs, and a tense abdominal wall will inhibit the downward travel of the diaphragm. Good posture allows the breathing mechanism to fulfill its basic function efficiently without any undue expenditure of energy. Good posture also makes it easier to initiate phonation and to tune the resonators as proper alignment prevents unnecessary tension in the body. Vocal pedagogists have also noted that when singers assume good posture it often provides them with a greater sense of self-assurance and poise while performing. Audiences also tend to respond better to singers with good posture. Habitual good posture also ultimately improves the overall health of the body by enabling better blood circulation and preventing fatigue and stress on the body. \n\nThere are eight components of the ideal singing posture:\n\nNatural breathing has three stages: a breathing-in period, breathing out period, and a resting or recovery period; these stages are not usually consciously controlled. Within singing, there are four stages of breathing: a breathing-in period (inhalation); a setting up controls period (suspension); a controlled exhalation period (phonation); and a recovery period.\n\nThese stages must be under conscious control by the singer until they become conditioned reflexes. Many singers abandon conscious controls before their reflexes are fully conditioned which ultimately leads to chronic vocal problems. \n\nVibrato is a technique in which a sustained note wavers very quickly and consistently between a higher and a lower pitch, giving the note a slight quaver. Vibrato is the pulse or wave in a sustained tone. Vibrato occurs naturally and is the result of proper breath support and a relaxed vocal apparatus. Some studies have shown that vibrato is the result of a neuromuscular tremor in the vocal folds. In 1922 Max Schoen was the first to make the comparison of vibrato to a tremor due to change in amplitude, lack of automatic control and it being half the rate of normal muscular discharge. Some singers use vibrato as a means of expression. Many successful artists can sing a deep, rich vibrato.\n\nExtended vocal techniques include rapping, screaming, growling, overtones, sliding , falsetto , yodeling , belting , use of vocal fry register , using sound reinforcement systems , among others. A sound reinforcement system is the combination of microphones, signal processors, amplifiers, and loudspeakers. The combination of such units may also use reverb, echo chambers and Auto-Tune among other devices.\n\nVocal music is music performed by one or more singers, which are typically called songs , and which may be performed with or without instrumental accompaniment, in which singing provides the main focus of the piece. Vocal music is probably the oldest form of music since it does not require any instrument or equipment besides the voice. All musical cultures have some form of vocal music and there are many long-standing singing traditions throughout the world's cultures. Music which employs singing but does not feature it prominently is generally considered instrumental music. For example, some blues rock songs may have a short, simple call-and-response chorus, but the emphasis in the song is on the instrumental melodies and improvisation. Vocal music typically features sung words called lyrics , although there are notable examples of vocal music that are performed using non-linguistic syllables or noises, sometimes as musical onomatopoeia . A short piece of vocal music with lyrics is broadly termed a song, although, in classical music , terms such as aria are typically used.\n\nVocal music is written in many different forms and styles which are often labeled within a particular genre of music. These genres include popular music , art music , religious music , secular music , and fusions of such genres. Within these larger genres are many subgenres. For example, popular music would encompass blues , jazz , country music , easy listening , hip hop , rock music , and several other genres. There may also be a subgenre within a subgenre such as vocalese and scat singing in jazz.\n\nIn many modern pop musical groups , a lead singer performs the primary vocals or melody of a song , as opposed to a backing singer who sings backup vocals or the harmony of a song. Backing vocalists sing some, but usually, not all, parts of the song often singing only in a song's refrain or humming in the background. An exception is five-part gospel a cappella music, where the lead is the highest of the five voices and sings a descant and not the melody . Some artists may sing both the lead and backing vocals on audio recordings by overlapping recorded vocal tracks.\n\nPopular music includes a range of vocal styles. Hip hop uses rapping , the rhythmic delivery of rhymes in a rhythmic speech over a beat or without accompaniment. Some types of rapping consist mostly or entirely of speech and chanting, like the Jamaican \" toasting \". In some types of rapping, the performers may interpolate short sung or half-sung passages. Blues singing is based on the use of the blue notes – notes sung at a slightly lower pitch than that of the major scale for expressive purposes. In heavy metal and hardcore punk subgenres, vocal styles can include techniques such as screams , shouts, and unusual sounds such as the \" death growl \".\n\nOne difference between live performances in the popular and Classical genres is that whereas Classical performers often sing without amplification in small- to mid-size halls, in popular music, a microphone and PA system (amplifier and speakers) are used in almost all performance venues, even a small coffee house. The use of the microphone has had several impacts on popular music. For one, it facilitated the development of intimate, expressive singing styles such as \" crooning \" which would not have enough projection and volume if done without a microphone. As well, pop singers who use microphones can do a range of other vocal styles that would not project without amplification, such as making whispering sounds, humming, and mixing half-sung and sung tones. As well, some performers use the microphone's response patterns to create effects, such as bringing the mic very close to the mouth to get an enhanced bass response, or, in the case of hip-hop beatboxers , doing plosive \"p\" and \"b\" sounds into the mic to create percussive effects. In the 2000s, controversy arose over the widespread use of electronic Auto-Tune pitch correction devices with recorded and live popular music vocals. Controversy has also arisen due to cases where pop singers have been found to be lip-syncing to a pre-recorded recording of their vocal performance or, in the case of the controversial act Milli Vanilli , lip-syncing to tracks recorded by other uncredited singers.\n\nWhile some bands use backup singers who only sing when they are on stage, it is common for backup singers in popular music to have other roles. In many rock and metal bands, the musicians doing backup vocals also play instruments, such as rhythm guitar , electric bass, or drums. In Latin or Afro-Cuban groups, backup singers may play percussion instruments or shakers while singing. In some pop and hip hop groups and in musical theater , the backup singers may be required to perform elaborately choreographed dance routines while they sing through headset microphones.\n\nThe salaries and working conditions for vocalists vary a great deal. While jobs in other music fields such as music education choir conductors tend to be based on full-time, salaried positions, singing jobs tend to be based on contracts for individual shows or performances, or for a sequence of shows.\n\nAspiring singers and vocalists must have musical skills, an excellent voice, the ability to work with people, and a sense of showmanship and drama. Additionally, singers need to have the ambition and drive to continually study and improve. \n\nProfessional singers continue to seek out vocal coaching to hone their skills, extend their range, and learn new styles. As well, aspiring singers need to gain specialized skills in the vocal techniques used to interpret songs, learn about the vocal literature from their chosen style of music, and gain skills in choral music techniques, sight singing and memorizing songs, and vocal exercises.\n\nSome singers learn other music jobs, such as the composing , music producing and songwriting . Some singers put videos on YouTube and streaming apps. Singers market themselves to buyers of vocal talent, by doing auditions in front of a music director . Depending on the style of vocal music that a person has trained in, the \"talent buyers\" that they seek out may be record company , A&R representatives, music directors, choir directors, nightclub managers, or concert promoters. A CD or DVD with excerpts of vocal performances is used to demonstrate a singer's skills. Some singers hire an agent or manager to help them to seek out paid engagements and other performance opportunities; the agent or manager is often paid by receiving a percentage of the fees that the singer gets from performing onstage.\n\nThere are several television shows that showcase singing. American Idol was launched in 2002. The first singing reality show was Sa Re Ga Ma Pa launched by Zee TV in 1995. At the American Idol Contestants audition in front of a panel of judges to see if they can move on to the next round in Hollywood, from then, the competition begins. The field of contestants is narrowed down week by week until a winner is chosen. To move on to the next round, the contestants' fate is determined by a vote by viewers. The Voice is another singing competition program. Similar to American Idol , the contestants audition in front of a panel of judges, however, the judges' chairs are faced towards the audience during the performance. If the coaches are interested in the artist, they will press their button signifying they want to coach them. Once the auditions conclude, coaches have their team of artists and the competition begins. Coaches then mentor their artists and they compete to find the best singer. Other well-known singing competitions include The X Factor , America's Got Talent , Rising Star and The Sing-Off .\n\nA different example of a singing competition is Don't Forget the Lyrics! , where the show's contestants compete to win cash prizes by correctly recalling song lyrics from a variety of genres. The show contrasts to many other music-based game shows in that artistic talent (such as the ability to sing or dance in an aesthetically pleasing way) is irrelevant to the contestants' chances of winning; in the words of one of their commercials prior to the first airing, \"You don't have to sing it well; you just have to sing it right.\" In a similar vein, The Singing Bee combines karaoke singing with a spelling bee-style competition, with the show featuring contestants trying to remember the lyrics to popular songs.\n\nEvery spoken language, natural or non-natural language has its own intrinsic musicality which affects singing by means of pitch, phrasing, and accent.\n\nAn artistic signer, a signer who translates the lyrics of a song into American Sign Language (ASL), can modify existing signs, create new signs from the three basic parameters of sign language, and manipulate the typical signing space, thus deliberately expressing \"rhythm, pitch, phrasing, and timbre.\" Moreover, an artistic signer can be a person who is \"Deaf, hearing, or hard of hearing\" such as Justina Miles, a Deaf performer who used ASL to interpret Rihanna's 2023 Super Bowl Halftime Show performance, and Stephen Torrence, a hearing person who created signed songs on YouTube. \n\nMuch research has been done recently on the link between music and language, especially singing. It is becoming increasingly clear that these two processes are very much alike, and yet also different. Levitin describes how, beginning with the eardrum, sound waves are translated into pitch, or a tonotopic map , and then shortly thereafter \"speech and music probably diverge into separate processing circuits\" (130). There is evidence that neural circuits used for music and language may start out in infants undifferentiated. There are several areas of the brain that are used for both language and music. For example, Brodmann area 47 , which has been implicated in the processing of syntax in oral and sign languages, as well as musical syntax and semantic aspects of language. Levitin recounts how in certain studies, \"listening to music and attending its syntactic features\", similar to the syntactic processes in language, activated this part of the brain. In addition, \"musical syntax ... has been localized to ... areas adjacent to and overlapping with those regions that process speech syntax, such as Broca's area \" and \"the regions involved in musical semantics ... appear to be [localized] near Wernicke's area .\" Both Broca's area and Wernicke's area are important steps in language processing and production.\n\nSinging has been shown to help stroke victims recover speech. According to neurologist Gottfried Schlaug, there is a corresponding area to that of speech, which resides in the left hemisphere, on the right side of the brain. This is casually known as the \"singing center\". By teaching stroke victims to sing their words, this can help train this area of the brain for speech. In support of this theory, Levitin asserts that \"regional specificity\", such as that for speech, \"may be temporary, as the processing centers for important mental functions actually move to other regions after trauma or brain damage.\" Thus in the right hemisphere of the brain, the \"singing center\" may be retrained to help produce speech. \n\nThe speaking dialect or accent of a person may differ greatly from the general singing accent that a person uses while singing. When people sing, they generally use the accent or neutral accent that is used in the style of music they are singing in, rather than a regional accent or dialect; the style of music and the popular center/region of the style has more influence on the singing accent of a person than where they come from. For example, in the English language, British singers of rock or popular music often sing in an American accent or neutral accent instead of an English accent. \n\nIn Iran women are not allowed to sing . ",
  "A diplomat (from Ancient Greek : δίπλωμα ; romanized diploma ) is a person appointed by a state , intergovernmental , or nongovernmental institution to conduct diplomacy with one or more other states or international organizations .\n\nThe main functions of diplomats are representation and protection of the interests and nationals of the sending state; initiation and facilitation of strategic agreements, treaties and conventions; and promotion of information, trade and commerce, technology, and friendly relations. Seasoned diplomats of international repute are used in international organizations (for example, the United Nations , the world's largest diplomatic forum) as well as multinational companies for their experience in management and negotiating skills. Diplomats are members of foreign services and diplomatic corps of various nations of the world.\n\nThe sending state is required to get the consent of the receiving state for a person proposed to serve in key diplomatic positions such as an ambassador, also referred to as the head of the mission. The receiving state of the proposed diplomat may accept the diplomat or refuse to accept the diplomat without having to provide reasons for its refusal or acceptance of the person. While the head of the mission or any member of the diplomatic staff is already on duty in the receiving state, the receiving state may still decide at anytime that the person is no longer wanted in the state and is considered persona non grata . When this happens, the sending state may discharge the person. \n\nDiplomats are the oldest form of any of the foreign policy institutions of a state, predating by centuries foreign ministers and ministerial offices. They usually have diplomatic immunity , and in their official travels they usually use a diplomatic passport or, for UN officials, a United Nations laissez-passer .\n\nThe regular use of permanent diplomatic representation began in the states of 15th-century Italy. However the terms \"diplomacy\" and \"diplomat\" appeared during the French Revolution . \"Diplomat\" is derived from the Greek διπλωμάτης ( diplōmátēs ), the holder of a diploma , referring to diplomats' documents of accreditation from their sovereign. \n\nDiplomats themselves and historians often refer to the foreign ministry by its address: the Ballhausplatz (Vienna), the Quai d’Orsay (Paris), the Wilhelmstraße (Berlin); Itamaraty (from the former Itamaraty Palace in Rio de Janeiro, now transferred to Brasília since 1970) and Foggy Bottom (Washington). For imperial Russia to 1917 it was the Choristers' Bridge (St Petersburg). The Italian ministry was called \"the Consulta\". \n\nThough any person can be appointed by the State's national government to conduct said state's relations with other States or international organizations, a number of States maintain an institutionalized group of career diplomats—that is, public servants with a steady professional connection to the country's foreign ministry . The term career diplomat is used worldwide in opposition to political appointees (that is, people from any other professional backgrounds who may equally be designated by an official government to act as diplomats abroad). While officially posted to an embassy or delegation in a foreign country or accredited to an international organization, both career diplomats and political appointees enjoy the same diplomatic immunities, as well as United Nations officials. Ceremonial heads of state commonly act as diplomats on behalf of their nation, usually following instructions from their head of Government. Sasson Sofer argues that, \"The ideal diplomat, by the nature of his mission, is destined to clash with the expedient needs of his country's politics.\" On the other hand, professional politicians often ridicule diplomats. President John F. Kennedy often denigrated career diplomats as \"weak and effeminate\" and moved foreign policy decisions out of their hands. \n\nEvery diplomat, while posted abroad, will be classified in one of the ranks of diplomats (secretary, counselor, minister, ambassador , envoy , or chargé d'affaires ) as regulated by international law (namely, by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961).\n\nDiplomats can be contrasted with consuls who help businesspeople, and military attachés . They represent not the foreign ministry but other branches of their government, but lack the diplomat's role in dealing with foreign policy at the highest level. \n\nDiplomats in posts collect and report information that could affect national interests, often with advice about how the home-country government should respond. Then, once any policy response has been decided in the home country's capital, posts bear major responsibility for implementing it. Diplomats have the job of conveying, in the most persuasive way possible, the views of the home government to the governments to which they are accredited and, in doing so, of trying to convince those governments to act in ways that suit home-country interests. In this way, diplomats are part of the beginning and the end of each loop in the continuous process through which foreign policy develops.\n\nIn general, it has become harder for diplomats to act autonomously. Diplomats use secure communication systems, such as emails, and mobile telephones that allow reaching even the most reclusive head of mission. This technology also gives diplomats the capacity for more immediate input about the policy-making processes in the home capital.\n\nSecure email has transformed the contact between diplomats and the ministry. It is less likely to leak, and enables more personal contact than the formal cablegram , with its wide distribution and impersonal style.\n\nThe home country will usually send instructions to a diplomatic post on what foreign policy goals to pursue, but decisions on tactics – who needs to be influenced, what will best persuade them, who are potential allies and adversaries, and how it can be done – are for the diplomats overseas to make.\n\nIn this operation, the intelligence, integrity, cultural understanding, and energy of individual diplomats become critical. If competent, they will have developed relationships grounded in trust and mutual understanding with influential members of the country in which they are accredited. They will have worked hard to understand the motives, thought patterns and culture of the other side.\n\nMost career diplomats have university degrees in international relations , political science , history , economics , or law . \" Emotional intelligence \" has recently become a component of many foreign service training programs. \n\nDiplomats have generally been considered members of an exclusive and prestigious profession. The public image of diplomats has been described as \"a caricature of pinstriped men gliding their way around a never-ending global cocktail party\". J. W. Burton has noted that \"despite the absence of any specific professional training, diplomacy has a high professional status, due perhaps to a degree of secrecy and mystery that its practitioners self-consciously promote.\" The state supports the high status, privileges, and self-esteem of its diplomats in order to support its own international status and position.\n\nThe high regard for diplomats is also due to most countries' conspicuous selection of diplomats, with regard to their professionalism and ability to behave according to a certain etiquette , in order to effectively promote their interests. Also, international law grants diplomats extensive privileges and immunities , which further distinguishes the diplomat from the status of an ordinary citizen .\n\nWhile posted overseas, there is a danger that diplomats may become disconnected from their own country and culture. Sir Harold Nicolson acknowledged that diplomats can become \"denationalised, internationalised and therefore dehydrated, an elegant empty husk\". Nicolson also claimed that personal motives often influenced the diplomatic pursuit of the national interest. For example, he wrote: \"Nobody who has not actually watched statesmen dealing with each other can have any real idea of the immense part played in human affairs by such unavowable and often unrecognisable causes as lassitude, affability, personal affection or dislike, misunderstanding, deafness or incomplete command of a foreign language, vanity, social engagements, interruptions and momentary health.\" \n\nTo prevent disconnection and apathy from their own state, many foreign services mandate their employees to return to their home countries in between period serving abroad.\n\nDiplomats have started celebrating International Day of Diplomats on October 24 since 2017. The idea of celebrating International Day of Diplomats on the day the United Nations was founded was proposed by Indian diplomat Abhay Kumar to mark the occasion as diplomacy becoming the principal means of resolving disputes. ",
  "Studio Ghibli, Inc. ( Japanese : 株式会社スタジオジブリ , Hepburn : Kabushiki-gaisha Sutajio Jiburi ) is a Japanese animation studio based in Koganei, Tokyo . It has a strong presence in the animation industry and has expanded its portfolio to include various media such as short subjects, television commercials and two television films. Their work has been well received by audiences and recognized with numerous awards. Their mascot and most recognizable symbol, the character Totoro from the 1988 film My Neighbor Totoro , is a giant spirit inspired by raccoon dogs ( tanuki ) and cats ( neko ). Among the studio's highest-grossing films are Princess Mononoke (1997), Spirited Away (2001), Howl's Moving Castle (2004), Ponyo (2008), and The Boy and the Heron (2023). Studio Ghibli was founded on June 15, 1985, by the directors Hayao Miyazaki and Isao Takahata and producer Toshio Suzuki , after acquiring Topcraft 's assets.\n\nFour of the studio's films are among the ten highest-grossing Japanese feature films ; Spirited Away is third, grossing 31.68 billion yen in Japan and over US$380 million worldwide. Three of their films have won the Animage Grand Prix award, four have won the Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year , and seven [ citation needed ] have received Academy Award nominations. Spirited Away won the 2002 Golden Bear and the 2003 Academy Award for Best Animated Feature . The Boy and the Heron won the 2024 Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film , BAFTA Award for Best Animated Film , and the 2024 Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. \n\nThe name \"Ghibli\" was chosen by Miyazaki from the Italian noun ghibli (also used in English), the nickname of Italy's Saharan scouting plane Caproni Ca.309 , in turn derived from the Italianization of the Libyan Arabic name for a hot desert wind ( قبلي qibliyy ). The name was chosen by Miyazaki due to his passion for aircraft and for the idea that the studio would \"blow a new wind through the anime industry\". Although the Italian word would be more accurately transliterated as \"Giburi\" ( ギブリ ) , with a hard g sound, the studio's name is written in Japanese as Jiburi ( ジブリ , [dʑiꜜbɯɾi] ⓘ ) . \n\nFounded on June 15, 1985, Studio Ghibli was headed by directors Hayao Miyazaki and Isao Takahata and producer Toshio Suzuki . Miyazaki and Takahata had already had long careers in Japanese film and television animation and had worked together on The Great Adventure of Horus, Prince of the Sun in 1968 and the Panda! Go, Panda! films in 1972 and 1973. Suzuki had been an editor at Tokuma Shoten 's Animage manga magazine. \n\nThe studio was founded after the success of the 1984 film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind . Suzuki was part of the film's production team, and founded Studio Ghibli with Miyazaki, who also invited Takahata to join them. \n\nThe studio has mainly produced films by Miyazaki, with the second most prolific director being Takahata (most notably with Grave of the Fireflies ). Other directors who have worked with Studio Ghibli include Yoshifumi Kondō , Hiroyuki Morita , Gorō Miyazaki , and Hiromasa Yonebayashi . Composer Joe Hisaishi has provided the soundtracks for most of Miyazaki's Studio Ghibli films. In their book Anime Classics Zettai! , Brian Camp and Julie Davis made note of Michiyo Yasuda as \"a mainstay of Studio Ghibli's extraordinary design and production team\". At one time the studio was based in Kichijōji , Musashino , Tokyo. \n\nIn August 1996, The Walt Disney Company and Tokuma Shoten formed a partnership wherein Walt Disney Studios would be the sole international distributor for Tokuma Shoten's Studio Ghibli animated films. Under this agreement, Disney also agreed to finance 10% of the studio's production costs. Since then, all three of the aforementioned films by Miyazaki at Studio Ghibli that were previously dubbed by Streamline Pictures have been re-dubbed by Disney. On June 1, 1997, Tokuma Shoten Publishing consolidated its media operations by merging Studio Ghibli, Tokuma Shoten Intermedia software and Tokuma International under one location. \n\nOver the years, there has been a close relationship between Studio Ghibli and the magazine Animage , which regularly runs exclusive articles on the studio and its members in a section titled \"Ghibli Notes\". Artwork from Ghibli's films and other works are frequently featured on the cover of the magazine. Saeko Himuro 's novel Umi ga Kikoeru was serialised in the magazine and subsequently adapted into Ocean Waves , Studio Ghibli's first animated feature-length film created for television. It was directed by Tomomi Mochizuki . \n\nIn October 2001, the Ghibli Museum opened in Mitaka, Tokyo . It contains exhibits based on Studio Ghibli films and shows animations, including a number of short Studio Ghibli films not available elsewhere.\n\nThe studio is also known for its strict \"no-edits\" policy in licensing their films abroad due to Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind being heavily edited for the film's release in the United States as Warriors of the Wind . \n\nBetween 1999 and 2005, Studio Ghibli was a subsidiary brand of Tokuma Shoten ; however, that partnership ended in April 2005, when Studio Ghibli was spun off from Tokuma Shoten and was re-established as an independent company with relocated headquarters. \n\nOn February 1, 2008, Toshio Suzuki stepped down from the position of Studio Ghibli president, which he had held since 2005, and Koji Hoshino (former president of Walt Disney Japan) took over. Suzuki said he wanted to improve films with his own hands as a producer, rather than demanding this from his employees. Suzuki decided to hand over the presidency to Hoshino because Hoshino has helped Studio Ghibli to sell its videos since 1996 and has also aided the release of the Princess Mononoke film in the United States. Suzuki still serves on the company's board of directors. \n\nTakahata developed a project for release after Gorō Miyazaki's (director of Tales from Earthsea and Hayao's son) The Tale of the Princess Kaguya – an adaptation of The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter . Miyazaki announced his retirement with The Wind Rises which is about the Mitsubishi A6M Zero and its creator, but returned with The Boy and the Heron in 2023, earning the director his second Academy Award .\n\nOn Sunday, September 1, 2013, Hayao Miyazaki held a press conference in Venice to confirm his retirement, saying: \"I know I've said I would retire many times in the past. Many of you must think, 'Once again.' But this time I am quite serious.\" \n\nIn 2013, a documentary directed by Mami Sunada called The Kingdom of Dreams and Madness ( Japanese : 夢と狂気の王国 , Hepburn : Yume to kyōki no ōkoku ) was created delving into the lives of those working at Studio Ghibli and the productions of the animated films The Wind Rises and The Tale of the Princess Kaguya , including storyboard sketching, inking, painting, and voice actor selection for the films. \n\nOn January 31, 2014, it was announced that Gorō Miyazaki will direct his first anime television series, Sanzoku no Musume Rōnya , an adaptation of Astrid Lindgren 's Ronia the Robber's Daughter for NHK . The series is computer-animated , produced by Polygon Pictures , and co-produced by Studio Ghibli. \n\nIn March 2014, Toshio Suzuki retired as producer and assumed the new position of general manager. Yoshiaki Nishimura replaced Suzuki in the producer role. \n\nOn August 3, 2014, Toshio Suzuki announced that Studio Ghibli would take a \"brief pause\" to re-evaluate and restructure in the wake of Miyazaki's retirement. He stated some concerns about where the company would go in the future. This led to speculation that Studio Ghibli will never produce another feature film again. On November 7, 2014, Miyazaki stated, \"That was not my intention, though. All I did was announce that I would be retiring and not making any more features.\" Lead producer Yoshiaki Nishimura among several other staffers from Ghibli, such as director Hiromasa Yonebayashi , left to found Studio Ponoc in April 2015, working on the film Mary and the Witch's Flower . \n\nThe 2016 animated fantasy film The Red Turtle , directed and co-written by Dutch-British animator Michaël Dudok de Wit in his feature film debut, was a co-production between Studio Ghibli and Wild Bunch . \n\nIn February 2017, Toshio Suzuki announced that Hayao Miyazaki had come out of retirement to direct a new feature film with Studio Ghibli. \n\nOn November 28, 2017, Koji Hoshino stepped down as president; he was replaced by Kiyofumi Nakajima (former Ghibli Museum director). Hoshino was then appointed as Chairman of Studio Ghibli. \n\nIn May 2020, Toshio Suzuki confirmed that a new film from Gorō Miyazaki is in development at Studio Ghibli. On June 3, 2020, Studio Ghibli announced that the film would be an adaptation of the novel Earwig and the Witch by Diana Wynne Jones . The film was announced as the first full 3D CG animated Ghibli film and slated for a television premiere on NHK in late 2020. The company had a net income of ¥1.253 billion , and a total asset worth ¥24.521 billion by August 2021. \n\nOn November 1, 2022, the Studio Ghibli themed amusement park Ghibli Park opened. \n\nOn April 4, 2023, Koji Hoshino announced that he had stepped down as chairman, and would serve as a representative director before planning to exit Studio Ghibli completely during the company's annual general shareholder's meeting in June, one month prior to the release of director Hayao Miyazaki's final movie The Boy and the Heron on July 14. He also announced that Toshio Suzuki would be replacing Kiyofumi Nakajima as president of Studio Ghibli, assuming the role for the first time since 2008, while Nakajima would continue to serve as a director. This change of management came about amidst reports that Suzuki had allegedly been mismanaging company funds by directing them towards his girlfriend's failed business ventures. This reportedly created tension between Suzuki and Hoshino, with the latter reportedly citing it as a long-term internal problem at the company since the couple met in 2013 and was the reason for his planned departure from the company, although a spokesperson for Studio Ghibli in a statement to Variety denied that Hoshino's departure had anything to do with these reports. The source of the allegations came from the tabloid paper, Shūkan Josei and was not corroborated by the mainstream media in Japan. \n\nIn October 2023, the studio became a subsidiary of Nippon Television Holdings, Inc. . Studio Ghibli's leadership transitioned to Hiroyuki Fukuda , a senior executive at NTV. Toshio Suzuki became chairman and Hayao Miyazaki became Honorary Chairman. Nippon TV acquired a 42.3% stake in Studio Ghibli. The decision was driven by the advanced ages of Miyazaki and Suzuki, aged 82 and 75, respectively. The studio had considered Miyazaki's son, Goro Miyazaki, as a successor but opted for external leadership due to concerns and Goro's reluctance. NTV started to handle management, allowing Studio Ghibli to focus on creative endeavors. The takeover took effect on October 6. \n\nIn 2024, the studio received an honorary Palme d'Or at the 2024 Cannes Film Festival , the first film production company to receive the award. \n\nIn Japan, most of the company's films are distributed by Toho theatrically, except for Castle in the Sky , Kiki's Delivery Service (which were distributed by Toei Company along with Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind ) and My Neighbors the Yamadas , which was distributed by Shochiku .\n\nFor home media, a majority of Studio Ghibli releases are distributed by Walt Disney Studios Japan . Pony Canyon occasionally releases Ghibli documentaries on home media, and distributes rental versions of Ghibli's movies under a deal with Disney. [ citation needed ] Pony Canyon also fully distributed the standalone version of Earwig and the Witch on home media. [ citation needed ]\n\nBefore the Disney deal, Tokuma Shoten released Ghibli movies themselves through their \"Animage Video\" imprint, as well as all LaserDisc releases of the movies, as the Disney deal did not include that format.\n\nAfter purchasing the global distribution rights from World Film Corporation, Manson International and Showmen, Inc. produced a 95-minute English dub of Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind , titled Warriors of the Wind , which was released theatrically in the United States by New World Pictures on June 14, 1985, followed by a VHS release in December 1985. The voice actors and actresses were not credited, and the film was heavily edited to give it a faster pace. The film received a PG rating just like Disney's later English dub. By removing several of the longer dialogue scenes, some of the environmentalist themes were simplified as was the main subplot of the Ohmu, altered to remove Nausicaä's childhood connection to them. Most of the characters' names were changed, including the titular character who became Princess Zandra. The North American poster and VHS cover featured a cadre of male characters who are not in the film, riding the resurrected God Warrior—including a still-living Warrior shown briefly in a flashback. Overall, approximately 22 minutes was cut for North American release. Warriors of the Wind also prompted Miyazaki to allow translator Toren Smith of Studio Proteus to create an official, faithful translation of the Nausicaä manga for Viz Media . \n\nIn the late 1980s, an English dub of Castle in the Sky was produced for international Japan Airlines flights at the request of Tokuma Shoten. The Castle dub was briefly screened in the United States by Streamline Pictures . Carl Macek , the head of Streamline, was disappointed with this dub, deeming it \"adequate, but clumsy\". Following this, Tokuma allowed Streamline to dub their future acquisitions My Neighbor Totoro and Kiki's Delivery Service . In April 1993, Troma Films , under their 50th St. Films banner, distributed the Totoro dub as a theatrical release, and the dub was later released onto VHS and eventually onto DVD by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment . In the early 1990s, an English dub of Porco Rosso was produced by Ward Sexton in Japan, again for international Japan Airlines flights. The original dubs can be seen on the 1996 Ghibli ga Ippai Laserdisc set, the initial copies for the Japanese DVD releases of Totoro , Laputa and Porco , and Fox's VHS and DVD release of Totoro .\n\nIn 1996, Walt Disney Studios acquired worldwide distribution rights to the Studio Ghibli library, with Disney redubbing all previously dubbed films. In addition, Walt Disney Studios Japan agreed to contribute 10% of the funding for all future releases, starting with My Neighbors the Yamadas , in exchange for right of first refusal regarding international distribution. Disney continues with this practice to this day, even extending it to the works of Studio Ponoc and to co-productions like The Red Turtle in Japan. It reportedly took four years for Disney and Studio Ghibli to reach a distribution deal. Originally, the Ghibli films were meant to headline a line of videos called Animation Celebration , highlighting critically acclaimed animated films from around the world. These plans never materialized in full, but the Animation Celebration logo can be seen on Disney's original VHS release of Kiki's Delivery Service . During Disney's tenure, the studio produced the English dubs and released 15 of Ghibli's films, plus Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind , through the Walt Disney Pictures , Buena Vista Home Video , Miramax (now-owned by Paramount ) and Touchstone Pictures banners. \n\nDisney and Ghibli have also selectively chosen not to promote and record an English-dubbed version for films and works deemed less internationally marketable, including some of Takahata's more developmental and obscure pieces. Although the Studio has a \"No cuts\" policy in terms of international versions and dubs, this does not apply to promotional posters, etc., for which the film makers collaborate with Disney to produce cultural appropriate international versions. The Studio has not shied away from rebranding on the international stage in order to convey tweaked promotional imagery for different cultural norms. One example of these tweaks to international promotional materials can be seen between the Japanese and English versions of the movie poster for Spirited Away (2001). For American and other English-speaking audiences, the name of the film was changed from the Japanese version, which directly translates roughly to, \"The Disappearance of Chihiro and Sen\", to Spirited Away to suggest more mystical, otherworldly themes, since the direct Japanese translation could be taken to mean that Chihiro/Sen disappeared due to some more dangerous reason. On the American movie poster, more pictures of spirits from the film were added to the background to further pique the viewer's interest with more supernatural themes, creating an association between the pictures spirits and what most American people would think of as \"ghosts\". For the Japanese poster, there are fewer spirits as the Japanese Shinto religion normalizes the existence of spirits, so less emphasis is needed to convey the importance of non-human spirits. Also, Disney enlarged the \"Studio Ghibli\" and \"Hayao Miyazaki\" labels on the poster, helping to bring greater awareness to the studio through the success of Spirited Away . \n\nIn 2011, GKIDS acquired the North American theatrical distribution rights of the aforementioned Ghibli films, with Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment retaining the home video rights. Afterwards, in 2013, GKIDS acquired the US and Canadian distribution rights to From Up on Poppy Hill . The film, which Disney passed on to GKIDS due to dealing with potential incest, marked the first time since 1996 that Disney handed a Studio Ghibli film off to another distributor. Afterwards, GKIDS would go on to distribute the films Disney found to be too mature or unmarketable for American audiences: Only Yesterday , Ocean Waves , The Tale of the Princess Kaguya and When Marnie Was There . In July 2017, Disney relinquished its home video rights (with the exception of The Wind Rises , which remained with Disney until 2020 due to a distribution clause) to GKIDS, which handles all theatrical and home media distribution of Ghibli films in North America along with Mary and the Witch's Flower . Nevertheless, Disney still continues to handle select distribution in Japan (home media), Taiwan and China (Both under Buena Vista International brand).\n\nGKIDS' home media releases have been handled by multiple distributors. Cinedigm distributed the home media release of Poppy Hill , Universal Pictures Home Entertainment distributed the home media releases of Kaguya , Marnie , Mary , Yesterday and Waves , and Shout! Factory all subsequent releases thus far. The Ghibli films owned by GKIDS were made available for digital purchases on most major services in the United States and Canada on December 17, 2019, through Shout! Factory. \n\nOutside Asia (including Japan) and North America since 2003, Goodfellas (a former subsidiary of Wild Bunch , formerly known as Wild Bunch International) has been Studio Ghibli's international sales holder. \n\nIndividual rights to Ghibli's films are held by various third parties, including Elysian Film Group and Anonymous Content (United Kingdom and Ireland), [ a ] Wild Bunch (France and Belgium), [ b ] Leonine (Germany), Gutek Film (Poland), Lucky Red (Italy), Vértigo Films (Spain), [ c ] Crunchyroll Store Australia (Australia and New Zealand) [ d ] and Encore Films / mm2 Entertainment [ e ] in Southeast Asia.\n\nNotably, The Secret World of Arrietty received a second dub exclusive to the United Kingdom, produced by StudioCanal UK, likely due to the film's origins being from Mary Norton 's British novel The Borrowers .\n\nDisney formerly held international sales rights until they were sold off to Goodfellas (then Wild Bunch) in 2003. Disney kept the French distribution rights to Ghibli's library until September 2020, when it had expired and transitioned off to Wild Bunch. Since 2021, Warner Bros. Home Entertainment serves as the home media distributor of Studio Ghibli's catalog via its distribution deal with Wild Bunch through the Wild Side Vidéo label. \n\nPrior to 2019, Studio Ghibli opted not to make its films available digitally, feeling that physical media and theatrical events like GKIDS ' Studio Ghibli Fest would work more towards their goal of mindful care and curation for their films. Disney had previously lobbied for a streaming deal with Ghibli during their distribution tenure, but such attempts were never materialized. The studio heads changed their minds after hearing a quote from American actor and director Woody Allen about how there should be multiple outlets for feature films. \n\nOn October 17, 2019, Warner Bros. Discovery 's HBO Max (now Max) announced it had acquired exclusive streaming rights to Studio Ghibli's catalogue in the United States as part of a deal with GKIDS ; these films were available when the service launched in May 2020. On January 20, 2020, it was announced that Netflix acquired the exclusive streaming rights to this catalogue in all regions where it operates except for the United States (in which Netflix does have streaming rights to The Castle of Cagliostro and Mary and the Witch's Flower ), as part of a deal with Ghibli's international sales rights partner Wild Bunch . Seven of twenty-one films in the studio's catalogue were released on February 1, 2020, with the others following on March 1 and April 1. Netflix then struck a separate deal with GKIDS for streaming rights in Canada which was announced on June 22, and came into effect on June 25 for most films. As of 2024, no streaming rights deals have yet been announced for Studio Ghibli's home country of Japan, nor for markets such as China where neither Netflix nor HBO Max is available.\n\nMost of the above deals exclude Grave of the Fireflies ; unlike most of the other films, which were published by Tokuma Shoten , Grave of the Fireflies was produced and is owned by Shinchosha , which also had published the short story it was based on, and as such, fell into different rights holdings. It was released in Japan on VHS by Buena Vista Home Entertainment under the Ghibli ga Ippai Collection on August 7, 1998. On July 29, 2005, a DVD release was distributed through Warner Home Video . Walt Disney Studios Japan released the complete collector's edition DVD on August 6, 2008. Walt Disney Studios Japan released the film on Blu-ray twice on July 18, 2012: one as a single release, and one in a two-film set with My Neighbor Totoro . [ citation needed ] StudioCanal released a Blu-ray in the United Kingdom on July 1, 2013. Madman Entertainment released the film in Australia and New Zealand. \n\nIt was released on VHS in North America by Central Park Media in a subtitled form on June 2, 1993. They later released the film with an English dub on VHS on September 1, 1998 (the same day Disney released Kiki's Delivery Service in North America) and an all-Regions DVD (which also included the original Japanese with English subtitles) on October 7 the same year. It was later released on a two-disc DVD set (which once again included both the English dub and the original Japanese with English subtitles as well as the film's storyboards with the second disc containing more extensive Bonus Features) on October 8, 2002. It was released by Central Park Media one last time on December 7, 2004. Following the May 2009 bankruptcy and liquidation of Central Park Media, ADV Films acquired the rights and re-released it on DVD on July 7, 2009. Following the September 1, 2009 shutdown and re-branding of ADV, their successor, Sentai Filmworks , rescued the film and released a remastered DVD on March 6, 2012. A Blu-ray edition was released on November 20, 2012, featuring an all-new English dub produced by Seraphim Digital , along with a digital release that same year. Netflix acquired the distribution rights to the film in 2024 and began featuring it for digital streaming outside of Japan on September 16, 2024. \n\nHorus and Cagliostro were the feature-length directorial debuts of Isao Takahata and Hayao Miyazaki respectively, and were produced by Toei Animation and TMS Entertainment years before the founding of Studio Ghibli.\n\nNausicaä was directed by Miyazaki at Topcraft , a studio which Miyazaki, Takahata and Toshio Suzuki later purchased and renamed Studio Ghibli. As a result, the film has often been rereleased and marketed as a Studio Ghibli movie.\n\nThe Red Turtle was a collaborative effort by Studio Ghibli with Dutch animator Michaël Dudok de Wit and was branded as a Studio Ghibli release internationally. It was distributed by Sony Pictures Classics in North and Latin America.\n\nFor the purposes of the list below, films that appear in Studio Ghibli's official filmography are listed. Other Studio Ghibli productions are listed here .\n\nStudio Ghibli films are mostly hand-drawn using rich watercolor and acrylic paints. The films use traditional methods of making animation where every frame is drawn and colored by hand. Computer animation techniques are used sparingly. All the Studio Ghibli films use bright colors, and have a \"whimsical and joyful aesthetic\". Studio Ghibli's art style tends to be more of a cozy European style that put a lot of undertones on the background and nature in the scene. A notable exception is The Tale of the Princess Kaguya , directed by Takahata, which departs from Ghibli's typical style by employing a soft watercolor palette and storybook-like aesthetic reminiscent of Japanese folk art. This approach aimed to reflect the emotions and inner struggles of the characters and highlight the hand-drawn animation. \n\nThe films often focus on the lives of youth, especially school children. Common themes include the risks posed by progress to tradition, environmentalism and the natural world, independent female protagonists, the cost of war, and youth. \n\nMuch of Studio Ghibli's music is composed by Joe Hisaishi, who has worked with Miyazaki on creating the music for his films for over 30 years. He uses storyboard images, provided by Miyazaki, to create an image album , which is then used to build out the final soundtrack for the movie. The music has elements from Baroque counterpoint , jazz , and modal music to create the unique sound that many associate with both Hisaishi and Studio Ghibli. Early on, the music in the films was known for its eclectic, synth sound, before later moving to more motivic and melody-driven music. Especially present in earlier years, the music does not directly relate to the emotions and rhythms happening on screen. Another defining feature is Hisaishi's unique use of leitmotif , rather than a singular song being associated with one character, the motif is the theme of the film. Hisaishi began using leitmotif in Ghibli films first in Howl's Moving Castle . ",
  "A rock festival is an open-air rock concert featuring many different performers, typically spread over two or three days and having a campsite and other amenities and forms of entertainment provided at the venue. Some festivals are singular events, while others recur annually in the same location. Occasionally, a festival will focus on a particular genre (e.g., folk , heavy metal , world music ), but many attempt to bring together a diverse lineup to showcase a broad array of popular music trends. \n\nInitially, some of the earliest rock festivals were built on the foundation of pre-existing jazz and blues festivals, but quickly evolved to reflect the rapidly changing musical tastes of the time. For example, the United Kingdom's National Jazz Festival was launched in Richmond from 26 to 27 August 1961. The first three of these annual outdoor festivals featured only jazz music, but by the fourth \"Jazz & Blues Festival\" in 1964, a shift had begun that incorporated some blues and pop artists into the lineup. In 1965, for the first time the event included more blues, pop and rock acts than jazz, and by 1966, when the event moved to the town of Windsor, the rock and pop acts clearly dominated the jazz artists. \n\nA similar, though more rapid, evolution occurred with Jazz Bilzen , a solely jazz festival that was inaugurated in 1965 in the Belgian city of Bilzen. The 1966 festival still featured mostly jazz acts. However, by the time of the third festival from 25 to 27 August 1967, rock and pop acts had edged out most of the jazz bands and become the main attraction. \n\nIn the United States, rock festivals seemed to spring up with a more self-defined musical identity. Preceded by several precursor events in the San Francisco area, the first two rock festivals in the US were staged in northern California on consecutive weekends in the summer of 1967: the KFRC Fantasy Fair & Magic Mountain Music Festival on Mount Tamalpais (10–11 June) and the Monterey International Pop Festival (16–17 June). \n\nThe concept caught fire and spread quickly as rock festivals took on a unique identity and attracted significant media attention around the world. By 1969, promoters were staging dozens of them. According to Bill Mankin, in their dawning age rock festivals were important socio-cultural milestones: \"... it would not be an exaggeration to say that, over a few short years, rock festivals played a unique, significant – and underappreciated – role in fueling the countercultural shift that swept not only America but many other countries [during the 1960s]. It seems fitting... that one of the most enduring labels for the entire generation of that era was derived from a rock festival: the ' Woodstock Generation'.\" \n\nReflecting their musical diversity and the then-common term ' pop music ', for the first few years, particularly in the US, many rock festivals were called 'pop festivals'. This also served to distinguish them among the ticket-buying public from other, pre-existing types of music festivals such as jazz and folk festivals. By the end of 1972, the term 'pop festival' had virtually disappeared as festival promoters adopted more creative, unique and location-specific names to identify and advertise their events. While it was still in vogue, however, over-zealous promoters eager to capitalize on the festival concept made the most of it, with some using the term \"Pop Festival\" or \"Rock Festival\" to advertise events held on a single day or evening, often indoors, and featuring only a handful of acts. \n\nToday, rock festivals are usually open-air concerts spread out over two or more days and many of the annual events are sponsored by the same organization. \n\nProduction and financing\n\nSeveral of the early rock festival organizers of the 1960s such as Chet Helms , Tom Rounds , Alex Cooley and Michael Lang helped create the blueprint for large-scale rock festivals in the United States, as well promoters such as Wally Hope in the United Kingdom. In various countries, the organizers of rock festivals have faced legal action from authorities, in part because such festivals have attracted large counterculture elements. In 1972, Mar Y Sol Pop Festival in Manatí, Puerto Rico attracted an estimated 30–35,000 people, and an arrest warrant was issued for promoter Alex Cooley, who avoided arrest by leaving the island before the festival was over. British Free Festival organizers Ubi Dwyer and Sid Rawle were imprisoned for attempting to promote a 1975 Windsor Festival. The British police would later outright attack free festival attendees at the 1985 Battle of the Beanfield .\n\nFestivals may require millions of USD to be organized, with the money often gathered through fundraising and angel investors . \n\nStages and sound systems\n\nWhile rock concerts typically feature a small lineup of rock bands playing a single stage, rock festivals often grow large enough to require several stages or venues with live bands playing concurrently. As rock music has increasingly been fused with other genres, sometimes stages will be devoted to a specific genre and may in turn become known and large enough to be seen as festivals themselves, such as was The Glade at the famous Glastonbury Festival in England.\n\nAdvances in sound reinforcement systems beginning in the 1960s enabled larger and larger rock festival audiences to hear the performers' music with much better clarity and volume. The best example was the pioneering work of Bill Hanley , known as the \"father of festival sound\", who provided the sound systems for numerous rock festivals including Woodstock. Other examples included the Wall of Sound invented in the 1970s to allow the Grateful Dead to play to larger audiences.\n\nCamping and crowd control\n\nMany festivals offer camping, either because lodging in the area is insufficient to support the crowd, or to allow easy multi-day access to the festival's features. Festival planning and logistics are frequently a focus of the media, some festivals such as the heavily commercialized Woodstock 1999 were crowd control disasters, with insufficient water and other resources provided to audiences. Many early rock festivals successfully relied on volunteers for crowd control , for example individuals like Wavy Gravy and biker groups such as the Hells Angels and Grim Reapers Motorcycle Club . Gravy in particular called his security group the \"Please Force,\" a reference to their non-intrusive tactics at keeping order, e.g., \"Please don't do that, please do this instead\". When asked by the press — who were the first to inform him that he and the rest of his commune were handling security — what kind of tools he intended to use to maintain order at Woodstock in 1969, his response was \"Cream pies and seltzer bottles .\" Other rock festivals hire private security or local police departments for crowd control, with varying degrees of success. \n\nSaturday, 21 June - Eric Anderson, Al Kooper, The Band, Bonzo Dog Band, Johnny Winter, Velvet Underground and Sly & the Family Stone.\nSunday, 22 June - Ronnie Hawkins, Chuck Berry, Kensington Market, Tiny Tim, Nucleus, Dr. John & the Night Tripper, Blood, Sweat & Tears and Steppenwolf\n\nA recent innovation is the traveling rock festival where many musical acts perform at multiple locations during a tour. Successful festivals are often held in subsequent years. The following is an incomplete list.\n\nThe following is a list of festivals that predominantly feature rock genres that take place on a regular basis. Most are held at the same location on an annual basis. Some, like Farm Aid are held at different venues with each incarnation.",
  "Baldegg Kloster railway station ( German : Bahnhof Baldegg Kloster ) is a railway station in the municipality of Hochdorf , in the Swiss canton of Lucerne . It is an intermediate stop on the standard gauge Seetal line of Swiss Federal Railways .\n\nThe following services stop at Baldegg Kloster: ",
  "Alexander Carl Heinrich Braun (10 May 1805 – 29 March 1877) was a German botanist from Regensburg , Bavaria. His research centered on the morphology of plants and was a very influential teacher who worked as a professor of botany at the universities of Freiburg, Giessen, and Berlin at various times. He was also the director of the Berlin Botanical Garden .\n\nBraun was born in Regensburg (Ratisbon) where his father Alexander was a tax inspector in the postal department. His mother Henriette was the daughter of a priest and mathematics professor. He studied at Karlsruhe and Freiburg (Breisgau) where his father was transferred. He went to the University of Heidelberg to study medicine. His teachers included Gottlieb Wilhelm Bischoff , Johann Heinrich Dierbach and Franz Joseph Schelver . At Heidelberg he studied with Louis Agassiz , Carl Schimper and George Engelmann . Agassiz would marry Braun's sister Cecilie while Schimper was engaged briefly to Braun's sister Emilie. He completed his studies at Paris and Munich . In 1833 he began teaching botany at the Polytechnic School of Karlsruhe , staying there until 1846. Afterwards he was a professor of botany in Freiburg (from 1846), Giessen (from 1850) and at the University of Berlin (1851), where he remained until 1877. While in Berlin, he was also director of the botanical garden . He designed the layout which was later documented by Paul Friedrich August Ascherson. In 1852, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences . With Gottlob Ludwig Rabenhorst (1806–1881) and Ernst Stizenberger (1827–1895), he was editor of the exsiccata series Die Characeen Europa's in getrockneten Exemplaren, unter Mitwirkung mehrerer Freunde der Botanik, gesammelt und herausgegeben von Prof. A. Braun, L. Rabenhorst und E. Stizenberger . \n\nBraun is largely known for his research involving plant morphology . He accepted evolution but was a critic of Darwinism . He was a proponent of vitalism , a popular 19th-century speculative theory that claimed that a regulative force existed within living matter in order to maintain functionality. Braun made important contributions in the field of cell theory . His students included August Wilhelm Eichler . \n\nFrom his 1830s analysis of the arrangement of scales on a pine cone he was a pioneer of mathematical phyllotaxis developing what is called the Schimper-Braun theory. \n\nIn 1877, Wilhelm Philippe Schimper and Philipp Bruch named the plant genus Braunia in his honor. Also, a decorative plant known as \"Braun's holly fern \" ( Polystichum braunii ) commemorates his name. ",
  "Genrō ( 元老 , lit. ' original elder ' ) was an unofficial designation given to a generation of elder Japanese statesmen , all born in the 1830s and 1840s, who served as informal extraconstitutional advisors to the emperor during the Meiji , Taishō , and early Shōwa eras of Japanese history .\n\nThe institution of genrō originated with the traditional council of elders ( Rōjū ) common in the Edo period ; however, the term genrō appears to have been coined by a newspaper only in 1892. The term is sometimes confused with the Genrōin (Chamber of Elders), a legislative body which existed from 1875–1890; however, the genrō were not related to the establishment of that body or its dissolution.\n\nExperienced leaders of the Meiji Restoration were singled out by the Emperor as genkun ( 元勲 , lit. ' original hero ' ) , and asked to act as Imperial advisors. With the exception of Saionji Kinmochi , all the genrō were from medium or lower ranking samurai families, four each from Satsuma and Chōshū , the two former domains that had been instrumental in the overthrow of the former Tokugawa shogunate in the Boshin War of the Meiji Restoration of 1867–1868. The genrō had the right to select and nominate Prime Ministers to the Emperor for approval.\n\nThe first seven genrō were all formerly members of the Sangi (Imperial Council) which was abolished in 1885. They are also sometimes known to historians as the Meiji oligarchy , although not all of the Meiji oligarchs were genrō .\n\nThe institution expired in 1940, with the death of the last of the genrō , Saionji Kinmochi.",
  "A distributary , or a distributary channel is a stream channel that branches off and flows away from a main stream channel. It is the opposite of a tributary , a stream that flows towards and into another stream or river. Distributaries are a result of river bifurcation and are often found where a river approaches a lake or an ocean and divides into distributary networks; as such they are a common feature of river deltas . They can also occur inland, on alluvial fans , or where a tributary stream bifurcates as it nears its confluence with a larger stream. In some cases, a minor distributary can divert so much water from the main channel that it can later become the main route.\n\nCommon terms to name individual river distributaries in English-speaking countries are arm and channel . These terms may refer to a distributary that does not rejoin the channel from which it has branched (e.g., the North, Middle, and South Arms of the Fraser River , or the West Channel of the Mackenzie River ), or to one that does (e.g. Annacis Channel and Annieville Channel of the Fraser River , separated by Annacis Island ).\n\nIn Australia, the term anabranch is used to refer to a distributary that diverts from the main course of the river and rejoins it later. In North America such a branching river is called a braided river . \n\nIn Louisiana , the Atchafalaya River is an important distributary of the Mississippi River . Because the Atchafalaya takes a steeper route to the Gulf of Mexico than does the Mississippi, over several decades the Atchafalaya has captured more and more of the Mississippi's flow, after the Mississippi meandered into the Red River of the South . The Old River Control Structure , a dam which regulates the outflow from the Mississippi into the Atchafalaya, was completed by the Army Corps of Engineers in 1963. The dam is intended to prevent the Atchafalaya from capturing the main flow of the Mississippi and stranding the ports of Baton Rouge and New Orleans . \n\nIn British Columbia , Canada, the Fraser River has numerous sloughs and side-channels which may be defined as distributaries. This river's final stretch has three main distributaries: the North Arm and the South Arm , and a few smaller ones adjoining them.\n\nExamples of inland distributaries:\n\nThe Casiquiare canal is an inland distributary of the upper Orinoco , which flows southward into the Rio Negro , forming a unique natural canal between the Orinoco and Amazon river systems. It is the largest river on the planet that links two major river systems.\n\nThe Huai River in China splits into three streams. The main stream passes through the Sanhe Sluice, goes out of the Sanhe river, and enters the Yangtze River through Baoying Lake and Gaoyou Lake . On the east bank of Hongze Lake , another stream goes out of Gaoliangjian Gate and enters the Yellow Sea at the port of Bidan through Subei Guan'gai Zongqu, the main irrigation channel of Northern Jiangsu ); its total length is 168 kilometers. The third stream leaves the Erhe lock on the northeast bank of Hongze Lake, passes the Huaishuhe River to the north of Lianyungang city, and flows into Haizhou Bay through the Hongkou.\n\nThe Tha Chin River and Noi River are distributaries of the Chao Phraya River in Thailand , splitting off from the latter about 200 kilometers upstream from the Bay of Bangkok .\n\nThe Brantas River in East Java , Indonesia , branches off into two distributaries, Mas River , also known as Surabaya River, and Porong River . \n\nThe Hong River in Northern Vietnam has notable distributaries such as the Day River , Ninh Co River and the Luoc River. All of these rivers empty into the Gulf of Tonkin .\n\nA number of the rivers that flow inland from Australia's Great Dividing Range form distributaries, most of which flow only intermittently during times of high river levels and end in shallow lakes or simply peter out in the deserts. Yarriambiack Creek , which flows from the Wimmera River into Lake Coorong, and Tyrrell Creek, which flows from the Avoca River into Lake Tyrrell , are two distributaries in Victoria . The Narran River flows from the Balonne River in Queensland into Narran Lake in New South Wales .\n\nMany of Papua New Guinea's major rivers flow into the Gulf of Papua through marshy, low-lying country, allowing for wide, many-branched deltas. These include the Fly River , which splits into three major and several minor rivers close to its mouth. The Bamu River splits into several channels close to its mouth, among them the Bebea , Bina , Dibiri , and Aramia . The Kikori River also splits into a multitude of channels as it crosses the plains close to the Gulf of Papua. The Purari River splits into three major channels as it approaches its mouth.\n\nNew Zealand's second-longest river, the Clutha River , splits into two arms, the Matau and the Koua , some 10 kilometres from the South Island's Pacific Coast. A large island, Inch Clutha , lies between the two arms. Many of the rivers crossing the Canterbury Plains in the central South Island are braided rivers , and several of these split into separate branches before reaching the coast. Notable among these is the Rangitata River , the two arms of which are separated by the low-lying Rangitata Island .",
  "The kanga (in some areas known as leso ) is a colourful fabric similar to kitenge , but lighter, worn by women and occasionally by men throughout the African Great Lakes region. It is a piece of printed cotton fabric , about 1.5 m by 1 m, often with a border along all four sides (called pindo in Swahili), and a central part ( mji ) which differs in design from the borders. They are sold in pairs, which can then be cut and hemmed to be used as a set.\n\nKangas have been a traditional type of dress amongst women in East Africa since the 19th century. \n\nAccording to some sources, it was developed from a type of unbleached cotton cloth imported from the US. The cloth was known as merikani in Zanzibar, a Swahili noun derived from the adjective American (indicative of the place it originated). Male slaves wrapped it around their waist and female slaves wrapped it under their armpits. To make the cloth more feminine, slave women occasionally dyed them black or dark blue, using locally obtained indigo. This dyed merikani was referred to as kaniki. People despised kaniki due to its association with slavery. Ex-slave women seeking to become part of the Swahili society began to decorate their merikani clothes. They did this using one of three techniques; a form of resist dying, a form of block printing or hand painting. After slavery was abolished in 1897, Kangas began to be used for self-empowerment and to indicate that the wearer had personal wealth.\n\nAccording to other sources, the origin is in the kerchief squares called lencos brought by Portuguese traders from India and Arabia. Stylish ladies in Zanzibar and Mombasa , started to use them stitching together six kerchiefs in a 3X2 pattern to create one large rectangular wrap. Soon they became popular in the whole coastal region, later expanding inland to the Great Lakes region. They are still known as lesos or lessos in some localities, after the Portuguese word.\n\nUntil the mid-twentieth century, they were mostly designed and printed in India, the Far East and Europe. Since the 1950s kangas started to be printed also in the city of Morogoro in Tanzania (MeTL Group Textile Company) and Kenya (Rivatex and Thika Cloth Mills Ltd are some of the largest manufacturers in Kenya) and other countries on the African continent. \n\nIn the early 1900s, proverbs, sayings, aphorisms and slogans were added to kangas. A trader in Mombasa, Kaderdina Hajee Essak, also known as \"Abdulla\", began to distinguish his kangas with the mark \"K.H.E. - Mali ya Abdulla\", to which he often added a proverb in Swahili. Initially they were printed in Arabic script , and later in Roman letters . Towards the eastern part of the region, phrases in Kiswahili are traditional, while in central areas phrases in both Kiswahili and Lingala are popular. \n\nThere are many different ways to wear kangas. One traditional way of wearing the kanga is to wrap one piece as a shawl, to cover the head and shoulders, and another piece wrapped around the waist. Kangas are also used as baby carriers. It can also be used by women for the Swahili traditional dance chakacha .\n\nWhereas kitenge is a more formal fabric used for nice clothing, the kanga is much more than a clothing piece, it can be used as a skirt, head-wrap, apron, pot-holder, towel, and much more. The kanga is culturally significant on Eastern coast of Africa, often given as a gift for birthdays or other special occasions. They are also given to mourning families in Tanzania after the loss of a family member as part of a michengo (or collection) into which many community members put a bit of money to support the family in their grief. Kangas are also similar to Kishutu and Kikoy which are traditionally worn by men. The Kishutu is one of the earliest known designs, probably named after a town in Tanzania, they are particular given to young brides as part of their dowry or by healers to cast off evil spirits. Due to its ritual function they do not always include a proverb. \n\nThe earliest pattern of the kanga was patterned with small dots or speckles, which look like the plumage of the guinea hen, also called \"kanga\" in Swahili. This is where the name comes from, contrary to the belief that it comes from a Swahili verb for to close. [ citation needed ]\n\nTypically, kangas consist of three parts: The pindo (wide border), the mji (central motif), Ujumbe or jina (the Kiswahili) is featured on a strip which contains a message. It is less commonly written in Arabic or Comorian . Other countries which produce their own Kangas write the Kanga messages/names in their main languages: in Madagascar (Malagasy Republic) where they are known as lambas , they feature ohabolana , traditional proverbs written in Malagasy ; they are also produced in Zambia and Malawi . This message is called the jina (literally 'name') of the kanga. Messages are often in the form of riddles or proverbs. When giving a kanga as a gift, one must be mindful of the proverb, as they can be somewhat insulting. Occasionally, one of these is given as a gift at a wedding to express a person's opinion that the couple should not be married. However, most of the messages express kind sentiments and good wishes. Some examples of proverbs:\n\nKanga can also be used to send political messages, mostly used during the campaign time Women will wear a specific Kanga to communicate a non-verbal message to their community. This form of communication, often between women can be about personal feeling, relationship, political, education. health or religion ",
  "Theosophy is an occult religious movement established in the United States in the late 19th century. Founded primarily by the Russian Helena Blavatsky and based largely on her writings, it draws heavily from both older European philosophies such as Neoplatonism and Indian religions such as Hinduism and Buddhism . Although many adherents maintain that Theosophy is not a religion, it is variably categorized by religious scholars as both a new religious movement and a form of occultism from within Western esotericism .\n\nAs presented by Blavatsky, Theosophy teaches that there is an ancient and secretive brotherhood of spiritual adepts known as the Masters , who are found around the world but primarily centered in Tibet . These Masters were alleged by Blavatsky to have cultivated great wisdom and supernatural powers, and Theosophists believe they initiated the modern Theosophical movement through disseminating their teachings via Blavatsky. Theosophists believe that these Masters are attempting to revive knowledge of an ancient religion once found around the world that will again come to eclipse existing world religions . Theosophy holds a monist position that there exists a single divine Absolute and articulates an emanationist cosmology in which the universe is perceived as outward reflections from this Absolute. The purpose of human life is spiritual emancipation and the human soul undergoes reincarnation upon bodily death according to a process of karma . Universal brotherhood and social improvement are guiding principles, although there is no particular ethical framework.\n\nTheosophy was established in New York City in 1875 with the founding of the Theosophical Society by Blavatsky and Americans Henry Olcott and William Quan Judge . In the early 1880s, Blavatsky and Olcott relocated to India, where they established the Society's headquarters at Adyar , Tamil Nadu . Blavatsky described her ideas in two books, Isis Unveiled and The Secret Doctrine , which became key texts within Theosophy. Following her death in 1891, there was a schism in the Society, with Judge leading the Theosophical Society in America (TSA) to split from the international organization. Under Judge's successor Katherine Tingley , a Theosophical community named Lomaland was established in San Diego , California. At its height in 1895, there were 102 American branches with nearly 6,000 members. The Adyar -based Society was later taken over by Annie Besant , under whom it grew to its largest extent during the late 1920s, before going into decline after the Great Depression. TSA has since been reincorporated as a national section of the global Theosophical Society, which has a global membership of roughly 26,606 across 70 countries, including over 3,550 in the United States.\n\nTheosophy played a significant role in bringing knowledge of Eastern religions to the West and encouraging cultural pride in South Asia. Many prominent artists and writers have also been influenced by Theosophical teachings. Theosophy has an international following, and during the 20th century had tens of thousands of adherents. Theosophical ideas have also inspired over 100 esoteric movements and philosophies, among them Anthroposophy , the Church Universal and Triumphant , and the New Age .\n\nHelena Blavatsky , the founder of Theosophy, insisted that it was not a religion, although she did refer to it as the modern transmission of the \"once-universal religion\" that she said had existed deep into the human past. Theosophical organizations have maintained the belief that Theosophy should not be labeled a religion; instead, they regard it as a system that embraces what they see as the \"essential truth\" underlying religion, philosophy, and science. As a result, Theosophical groups allow their members to hold other religious allegiances, resulting in Theosophists who also identify as Christians, Buddhists, or Hindus. \n\nScholars of religion who have studied Theosophy have characterized it as a religion. In his history of the Theosophical movement, Bruce F. Campbell noted that Theosophy promoted \"a religious world-view\" using \"explicitly religious terms\" and that its central tenets are not unequivocal fact, but rather rely on belief. Olav Hammer and Mikael Rothstein termed it \"one of the modern world's most important religious traditions\". Various scholars have pointed to its eclectic nature; Joscelyn Godwin described it as a \"universally eclectic religious movement\", while scholar J. Jeffrey Franklin characterized Theosophy as a \"hybrid religion\" for its syncretic combination of elements from various other sources. More specifically, Theosophy has been categorized as a new religious movement . \n\nScholars have also classified Theosophy as a form of Western esotericism . Campbell for instance referred to it as \"an esoteric religious tradition\", while the historian Joy Dixon called it an \"esoteric religion\". More specifically, it is considered a form of occultism. Along with other groups such as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn , the Theosophical Society has been seen as part of an \"occult revival\" that took place in Western countries during the late 19th century. The historian of religion Wouter Hanegraaff noted that Theosophy helped to establish the \"essential foundations for much of twentieth-century esotericism\". Although Theosophy draws upon Indian religious beliefs, the sociologist of religion Christopher Partridge observed that \"Theosophy is fundamentally Western. That is to say, Theosophy is not Eastern thought in the West, but Western thought with an Eastern flavour.\" \n\nAccording to Maria Carlson, Theosophy is a \"positivistic religion\" \"offering a seemingly logical theology based on pseudoscience.\" \n\nAt a meeting of the Miracle Club in New York City on 7 September 1875, Blavatsky, Olcott, and Judge agreed to establish an organisation, with Charles Sotheran suggesting that they call it the Theosophical Society . Prior to adopting the name \"Theosophical\", they had debated various potential names, among them the Egyptological Society, the Hermetic Society, and the Rosicrucian Society. \n\nThe term was not new; originally it appeared in the works of early Church Fathers , as a synonym for theology . It derives from Ancient Greek : θεός , romanized : theós , lit. 'god' and Ancient Greek : σοφῐ́ᾱ , romanized : sophíā , lit. 'wisdom'; thus meaning \"god-wisdom\", \"divine wisdom\", or \"wisdom of God\". Its esoteric meaning emerged during the Renaissance period , possibly originating in the 1575 Arbatel De Magia Veterum , a Latin grimoire and the first work to draw a dualism between what it calls \"anthroposophia\" (human knowledge) and \"theosophia\" (divine knowledge). It had consequently been used in various esoterics contexts for example by the Philaletheians and by the Christian mystic Jakob Böhme . In her book The Key to Theosophy , Blavatsky claims that the term Theosophy had been coined by \"the Alexandrian philosophers\", especially Ammonius Saccas . \n\nBlavatsky's Theosophy is not the only movement to use the term \"theosophy\" and this has resulted in scholarly attempts to differentiate the different currents. Godwin drew a division by referring to Blavatskian Theosophy with a capital letter and older, Boehmian theosophy with a lower-case letter. Alternately, the scholar of esotericism Wouter J. Hanegraaff distinguished the Blavatskian movement from its older namesake by terming it \"modern Theosophy\". Followers of Blavatsky's movement are known as Theosophists, while adherents of the older tradition are termed theosophers. Causing some confusion, a few Theosophists – such as C. C. Massey – were also theosophers. In the early years of Blavatsky's movement, some critics referred to it as \"Neo-Theosophy\" to differentiate it from the older Christian theosophy movement. The term \" Neo-Theosophy \" would later be adopted within the modern Theosophical movement itself, where it was used—largely pejoratively—to describe the teachings promoted by Annie Besant and Charles Webster Leadbeater by those who opposed their innovations. \n\nAccording to the scholar of religion James A. Santucci, discerning what the term \"Theosophy\" meant to the early Theosophists is \"not as obvious as one might think\". As used by Olcott, the term \"Theosophy\" appeared to be applied to an approach that emphasized experimentation as a means of learning about the \"Unseen Universe\"; conversely, Blavatsky used the term in reference to gnosis regarding said information. \n\nAlthough the writings of prominent Theosophists lay out a set of teachings, the Theosophical Society itself states that it has no official beliefs with which all members must agree. It, therefore, has doctrine but does not present it as dogma. The Society stated that the only tenet to which all members should subscribe was a commitment \"to form a nucleus of the Universal Brotherhood of Humanity without distinction of race, creed, sex, caste or color\". This means that there are members of the Theosophical Society who are skeptical about many, or even all, of the Theosophical doctrines while remaining sympathetic to its basic aim of universal brotherhood. \n\nAs noted by Santucci, Theosophy is \"derived primarily from the writings\" of Blavatsky, but revisions and innovations have also been produced by subsequent Theosophists such as Annie Besant and Charles Webster Leadbeater . Blavatsky said that these Theosophical doctrines were not her own invention but had been received from a brotherhood of secretive spiritual adepts whom she referred to as the \"Masters\" or \"Mahatmas\". \n\nCentral to Theosophical belief is the idea that a group of spiritual adepts known as the Masters not only presently exist but were responsible for producing early Theosophical texts. For most Theosophists, these Masters are deemed the real founders of the modern Theosophical movement. In Theosophical literature, these Masters are also referred to as the Mahatmas, Adepts, Masters of Wisdom, Masters of Compassion, and Elder Brothers. They are perceived to be a fraternity of human men who are highly evolved in terms of having both moral development and intellectual attainment. They are said to have achieved extra-long life spans, and to have gained supernatural powers, including clairvoyance and the ability to instantly project their soul out of their body to any other location . These are powers they have allegedly attained through many years of training. According to Blavatsky, by the late 19th century, their chief residence was in the Himalayan kingdom of Tibet . She also said that these Masters were the source of many of her published writings. \n\nThe Masters are believed to preserve the world's ancient spiritual knowledge, and to represent a Great White Brotherhood or White Lodge, which watches over humanity and guides its evolution. Among those whom the early Theosophists believed as Masters were Biblical figures such as Abraham , Moses , Solomon , and, in the Christian Bible, Jesus , as well as Asian religious figures such as Gautama Buddha , Confucius , and Laozi , and modern individuals such as Jakob Bohme , Alessandro Cagliostro , and Franz Mesmer . However, the most prominent Masters to appear in Theosophical literature are Koot Hoomi (sometimes spelled Kuthumi) and Morya , with whom Blavatsky declared to be in contact. According to Theosophical belief, the Masters approach those deemed worthy to embark on an apprenticeship or chelaship . The apprentice would then undergo several years of probation, during which they would live a life of physical purity, remaining chaste, abstinent, and indifferent to physical luxury. Blavatsky encouraged the production of images of the Masters. The most important portraits of the Masters to be produced were created in 1884 by Hermann Schmiechen . According to scholar of religion Massimo Introvigne , Schmiechen's images of Morya and Koot Humi gained \"semi-canonical status\" in the Theosophical community, being regarded as sacred objects rather than simply decorative images. \n\nCampbell noted that for non-Theosophists, the hypotheses regarding the existence of the Masters are among the weakest made by the movement. Such statements can be examined and potentially refuted, challenging the existence of the Masters and thereby undermining Theosophical beliefs. The idea of a brotherhood of secret adepts had a long pedigree stretching back several centuries before the foundation of Theosophy; such ideas can be found in the work of the Rosicrucians , and was popularized in the fictional literature of Edward Bulwer-Lytton . The idea of having messages conveyed to a medium through spiritually advanced entities had also been popularized at the time of Theosophy's foundation through the Spiritualist movement. \n\nAccording to Blavatsky's teachings, many of the world's religions have their origins in a universal ancient religion, a \"secret doctrine\" that was known to Plato and early Hindu sages and which continues to underpin every religion. She argued that ancient societies demonstrated a unity of science and religion that humanity has since lost, with their achievements and knowledge far exceeding what modern scholars believe about them. Blavatsky also taught that a secret brotherhood had conserved this ancient wisdom religion throughout the centuries and that members of this fraternity hold the key to understanding miracles, the afterlife, and psychic phenomena and that moreover, these adepts themselves have paranormal powers. \n\nShe stated that this ancient religion would be revived and spread throughout humanity in the future, replacing dominant world religions such as Christianity , Islam , Buddhism , and Hinduism . Theosophy emphasized the importance of ancient texts over the popular rituals and customs within various religious traditions. The Theosophical depiction of Buddhism and Hinduism , however, drew criticism both from practitioners of orthodox Buddhist and Hindu traditions, as well as from Western scholars of these traditions, such as Max Müller , who believed that Theosophists such as Blavatsky were misrepresenting the Asian traditions. \n\nTheosophy advocates an emanationist cosmology , asserting that the universe is an outward reflection of the Absolute . Theosophy presents the idea that the world as humans perceive it is illusory, or maya , an idea that it draws from Asian religions. Accordingly, Blavatsky taught that a life limited by the perception of this illusory world was ignorant and deluded. \n\nAccording to Blavatsky's teaching, every solar system in the universe is the expression of what is termed a \" Logos \" or \" Solar Deity \". Below the solar deity are seven planetary spirits or ministers, with each of these celestial beings controlling the evolution on a specific planet. In The Secret Doctrine , Blavatsky stated that each planet had a sevenfold constitution, known as the \"Planetary Chains\"; these consist not only of a physical globe but also of two astral bodies, two mental bodies, and two spiritual bodies, all overlapping in the same space. According to Blavatsky, evolution occurs in descending and ascending arcs, from the first spiritual globe to the first mental globe, then from the first astral globe to the first physical globe, and then on from there. She said there were different levels of evolution, from mineral to vegetable, animal, human, and then to superhuman or spiritual. Different levels of evolution occur in successive order on each planet; thus, when mineral evolution ends on the first planet, and it proceeds on to vegetable evolution, then mineral evolution begins on the second planet. Theosophy teaches that human evolution is tied to this planetary and wider cosmic evolution. \n\nIn The Secret Doctrine , Blavatsky advocated the idea of seven \" Root Races \", each of which was divided into seven \"Sub-Races\". In Blavatsky's cosmogony , the first Root Race was created from pure spirit and lived on a continent known as the \"Imperishable Sacred Land\". The second Root Race, known as the Hyperboreans , were also formed from pure spirit and lived on a land near to the North Pole , which then had a mild climate. The third lived on the continent of Lemuria , which Blavatsky alleged survives today as Australia and Rapa Nui. Blavatsky alleged that during the fourth Round of the Earth, [ definition needed ] higher beings descended to the planet, with the beginnings of human physical bodies developing and the sexes separating. At this point, the fourth Root Race appeared, living on the continent of Atlantis ; they had physical bodies but also psychic powers and advanced technology. She said that some Atlanteans were giants and built such ancient monuments as Stonehenge in southern England and that they also mated with \"she-animals\", resulting in the creation of gorillas and chimpanzees . The Atlanteans were decadent and abused their power and knowledge, so Atlantis sank into the sea, although various Atlanteans escaped and created new societies in Egypt and the Americas. \n\nThe fifth Root Race to emerge was the Aryans , which was found worldwide when she was writing. She believed that the fifth Race would come to be replaced by the sixth, which would be heralded by the arrival of Maitreya , a figure from Mahayana Buddhist mythology. She further believed that humanity would eventually develop into the final, seventh Root Race. At this, she stated that humanity will have reached the end of its evolutionary cycle and that life will withdraw from the Earth. Lachman suggested that by reading Blavatsky's cosmogonical beliefs as a literal account of history, \"we may be doing it a disservice.\" He instead suggested that it could be read as Blavatsky's attempt to formulate \"a new myth for the modern age, or as a huge, fantastic science fiction story\". \n\nBlavatsky taught that Lord Maitreya —a figure she borrowed from Buddhism—would come to Earth as a messianic figure. Her ideas on this were expanded upon by Besant and Leadbeater. They said that Maitreya had previously incarnated onto the Earth as Krishna , a figure from Hinduism. They also said that he had entered Jesus of Nazareth at the time of the latter's baptism and that henceforth Maitreya would be known as \"the Christ \". Besant and Leadbeater said that Maitreya would again come to Earth by manifesting through an Indian boy named Jiddu Krishnamurti , whom Leadbeater had encountered playing on a beach at Adyar in 1909. The introduction of the Krishnamurti belief into Theosophy has been identified as a millenarian element. \n\nAccording to Theosophy, the purpose of human life is the spiritual emancipation of the soul. The human individual is described as an \"Ego\" or \"Monad\" and believed to have emanated from the Solar Deity, to whom it will also eventually return. The human being is presented as composed of seven parts while operating on three separate planes of being. As presented by Sinnett and often repeated in Theosophical literature, these seven parts are the Body ( Rupa ), Vitality ( Prana-Jiva ), the Astral Body ( Linga Sarira ), the Animal Soul ( Kama-Rupa ), the Human Soul ( Manas ), the Spiritual Soul ( Buddhi ), and the Spirit ( Atma ). According to Theosophical teaching, the latter three of these components are immortal, while the other aspects perish following bodily death. Theosophy teaches that the Spiritual Soul and the Spirit do not reside within the human body alongside the other components but are connected to it through the human soul. \n\nIn The Voice of the Silence , Blavatsky said that within each human, there is an eternal, divine facet, which she referred to as \"the Master,\" the \"uncreate,\" the \"inner God,\" and the \"higher self.\" She promoted the idea that uniting with this \"higher self\" results in wisdom. In that same book, she compared the progress of the human soul to a transition through three halls; the first was that of ignorance, which is the state of the soul before it understands the need to unite with its higher self. The second is the Hall of Learning, in which the individual becomes aware of other facets of human life but is distracted by an interest in psychic powers. The third is the Hall of Wisdom, in which union with the higher self is made; the Vale of Bliss follows this. At this point, the human soul can merge into the One. \n\nThroughout her writings, Blavatsky made a variety of statements about rebirth and the afterlife, and there is a discrepancy between her earlier and later teachings on the subject. Between the 1870s and c. 1882 , Blavatsky taught a doctrine called \"metempsychosis\". In Isis Unveiled , Blavatsky stated that the human soul progresses through more spiritual planes on bodily death. Two years later, she introduced the idea of reincarnation into Theosophical doctrine, using it to replace her metempsychosis doctrine. In The Secret Doctrine , she stated that the spirit was immortal and would repeatedly incarnate into a new, mortal soul and body on Earth. According to Theosophical teaching, human spirits will always be reborn into human bodies and not into those of any other life forms. Blavatsky stated that spirits would not be reborn until some time after bodily death and never during the lifetime of the deceased's relatives. \n\nBlavatsky taught that on the death of the body, the astral body survives for a time in a state called kama-loka , which she compared to limbo , before also dying. According to this belief, the human then moves into its mental body in a realm called devachan , which she compared to Heaven or paradise . Blavatsky taught that the soul remained in devachan for 1000 to 1500 years, although the Theosophist Charles Webster Leadbeater said that it was only 200. \n\nTheosophy espouses the existence of karma as a system that regulates the cycle of reincarnation, ensuring that an individual's actions in one life affect the circumstances of the next one. This belief, therefore, seeks to explain why misery and suffering exist in the world, attributing any misfortune that someone suffers as punishment for misdeeds that they perpetrated in a prior life. In Blavatsky's words, karma and reincarnation were \"inextricably interwoven\". However, she did not believe that karma had always been the system that governed reincarnation; she believed that it came into being when humans developed egos and that one day will also no longer be required. \n\nBesant and Leadbeater said they were able to investigate people's past lives through reading the akashic record , an etheric store of all the knowledge of the universe. They, for instance, stated to have attained knowledge of their own past lives as monkey-like creatures residing on the moon, where they served as pets to the \"Moon-man\" (a prior incarnation of the Master Morya), his wife (Koot Humi), and their child (the Lord Maitreya). When they were attacked by \"savages\" and animals \"resembling furry lizards and crocodiles\", Besant sacrificed herself to save Morya, and for that act made the karmic evolutionary leap to becoming a human in her next incarnation. \n\nTheosophy does not express any formal ethical teaching, a situation that generated ambiguity. However, it has expressed and promoted certain values, such as brotherhood and social improvement. During its early years, the Theosophical Society promoted a puritanical attitude toward sexuality, for instance, by encouraging chastity even within marriage. \n\nBy 1911, the Theosophical Society was involved in projects connected to a range of progressive political causes. In England, there were strong links between Theosophy and first-wave feminism . Based on a statistical analysis, Dixon noted that prominent English feminists of the period were several hundred times more likely to join the Theosophical Society than the average member of the country's population. Theosophical contingents took part in feminist marches of the period; for instance, a Theosophical group operating under the banner of Universal Co-Freemasonry marched as part of the Women's Coronation Procession in 1911. \n\nThe Theosophical Society did not prescribe specific rituals for adherents to practice. However, ritualized practices have been established by various Theosophical groups; one such group is the Liberal Catholic Church . Another is the meetings of the United Lodge of Theosophists , which has been characterized as having a \"quasi-sacred and quasi-liturgical\" character. \n\nThe American social situation from which the Theosophical Society emerged was one of great upheaval, and the religious situation was one of challenge to orthodox Christianity. The forces that had surfaced in spiritualism included anticlericalism, anti-institutionalism, eclecticism, social liberalism, and belief in progress and individual effort. Occultism, mediated to America in the form of Mesmerism, Swedenborgianism, Freemasonry, and Rosicrucianism, was present. Recent developments in science led by the 1870s to renewed interest in reconciling science and religion. There was present also a hope that Asian religious ideas could be integrated into a grand religious synthesis.\n\nThe Theosophical Society was largely the creation of two individuals: Helena Blavatsky and Henry Steel Olcott. Established Christianity in the United States was experiencing challenges in the second half of the nineteenth century, a result of rapid urbanization and industrialization, high rates of immigration, and the growing understanding of evolutionary theory which challenged traditional Christian accounts of history. Various new religious communities were established in different parts of the country, among them the Free Religious Association , New Thought , Christian Science , and Spiritualism . Theosophy would inherit the idea – then popular in the United States – that emphasized the idea of free will and the inevitability of progress , including on a spiritual level. It was also influenced by a growing knowledge about Asian religions in the United States. \n\nPrior to her arrival in the United States, Blavatsky had experience with esoteric currents such as Spiritualism. It was through Spiritualism that Blavatsky and Olcott met. \n\nIn 1884, Olcott established the first Scottish lodge, in Edinburgh. \n\nIn 1980, Campbell noted that Theosophical books were selling at record levels. \n\nIn the United States, Judge had been devoting himself to the promotion of Theosophy with little success. \n\nDuring her lifetime, Blavatsky had suggested to many different people that they would be her successor. Three of the most prominent candidates – Olcott, Judge, and Besant – all met in London shortly after her death to discuss the situation. Judge said that he too was in contact with the Masters, and that they had provided him with a message instructing him to co-delegate the Society's Esoteric Section with Besant. Olcott, however, suspected that the notes from the Masters which Judge was producing were forged, exacerbating tensions between them. Besant attempted to act as a bridge between the two men, while Judge informed her that the Masters had revealed to him a plot that Olcott was orchestrating to kill her. In 1893, Besant came down on Olcott's side in the argument and backed the internal proceedings that Olcott raised against Judge. A two-stage enquiry took place, which concluded that because the Society took no official stance on whether the Masters existed or not, Judge could not be considered guilty of forgery and would be allowed to retain his position. The details of this trial were leaked to the journalist F. Edmund Garrett , who used them as the basis of his critical book, Isis Very Much Unveiled . Judge then announced that the Masters had informed him that he should take sole control of the Esoteric Section, deposing Besant; she rejected his beliefs. Amid calls from Olcott that Judge should stand down, in April 1895 the American section voted to secede from the main Society. Judge remained its leader, but died within a year. \n\nOlcott then sent Besant to the United States to gain support for the Adyar-based [ citation needed ] Society. In this she was successful, gaining thousands of new members and establishing many new branches. Besant had developed a friendship with the Theosophist Charles Webster Leadbeater , and together they co-wrote a number of books. Leadbeater was controversial, and concerns were raised when he was found to have instructed two boys in masturbation . The American Section of the Theosophical Society raised internal charges against him, although Besant came to his defense. In a move probably designed to limit negative publicity for the Society, they accepted his resignation rather than expelling him. \n\nOn Olcott's death in 1907, he had nominated Besant to be his successor, and she was then elected to the position with a large majority in June. In her first years as the head of the Society, Besant oversaw a dramatic growth in its membership, raising it by 50%, to 23,000. She also oversaw an expansion of the Adyar property, from 27 to 253 acres. Besant was involved in various activist causes, promoting women's rights in India through the Women's Indian Association and helping to establish both the Central Hindu College and a Hindu girls' school. Besant also began a campaign for Indian Home Rule, founding a group called the Home Rule League. She established the New India newspaper, and after continuing to promote Indian independence in the paper's pages during the First World War she was interned for several months. This helped to boost her status within the independence movement, and at the age of 70 she was appointed President of the Indian National Congress , a largely honorary position. \n\nIn December 1908, Leadbeater was readmitted to the Society; this generated a wave of resignations, with the Sydney branch seceding to form the Independent Theosophical Society. Leadbeater traveled to Adyar, where he met a young boy living there, Jiddu Krishnamurti , and pronounced him to be the next incarnation of a figure called the World Teacher . He subsequently took control of the boy's instruction for two years. With Besant, Leadbeater established a group known as the Order of the Star in the East to promote the idea of Krishnamurti as World Teacher. Leadbeater also wanted more ritual within Theosophy, and to achieve this he and J. I. Wedgwood became bishops in the Old Catholic Church . They then split from that to form their own Liberal Catholic Church , which was independent from the Theosophical Society (Adyar) while retaining an affiliation with it. The Church drew most of its membership from the Society and heavily relied upon its resources. However, in 1919 the Church was marred by police investigations into allegations that six of its priests had engaged in acts of pedophilia and Wedgewood — who was implicated in the allegations — resigned from the organization. \n\nIn retaliation, a \"Back to Blavatsky\" movement emerged within the Society. Its members pejoratively referred to Besant and her followers as practitioners of \"Neo-Theosophy\", objecting to the Liberal Catholic Church's allegiance to the Pope, and to the prominence that they were according to Besant and Leadbeater's publications. The main benefactor of the disquiet within the Back to Blavatsky movement was a rival group called the United Lodge of Theosophists . One of the most prominent figures to switch allegiance was B. P. Wadia . The United Lodge of Theosophists had been established in Los Angeles in 1909, when it had split from Judge's Theosophical Society in America, seeking to minimize formal organization. It focused on publishing new editions of Blavatsky and Judge's writings, as well as other books, which were usually released anonymously so as to prevent any personality cults developing within the Theosophical movement. \n\nThe Adyar Society membership later peaked at 40,000 in the late 1920s. The Order of the Star had 30,000 members at its height. Krishnamurti himself repudiated these beliefs, insisting that he was not the World Teacher, and then resigned from the Society; the effect on the society was dramatic, as it lost a third of its membership over the coming few years. Besant died in 1933, when the Society was taken over by George Arundale , who led it until 1945; the group's activities were greatly curtailed by World War II . \n\nJudge left no clear successor as leader of the Theosophical Society in America, but the position was taken by Katherine Tingley , who said that she remained in mediumistic contact with Judge's spirit. Tingley launched an international campaign to promote her Theosophical group, sending delegations to Europe, Egypt, and India. In the latter country they clashed with the Adyar-based [ citation needed ] Theosophical Society, and were unsuccessful in gaining converts. Her leadership would be challenged by Ernest T. Hargrove in 1898, and when he failed he split to form his own rival group . In 1897, Tingley had established a Theosophical community, Lomaland , at Point Loma in San Diego , California. Various Theosophical writers and artists congregated there, while horticultural development was also emphasized. In 1919, the community helped establish a Theosophical University. Longstanding financial problems coupled with an aging population resulted in the Society selling Lomaland in 1942. Meanwhile, Tingley's death in 1929 had resulted in the Theosophical Society in America being taken over by Gottfried de Purucker , who promoted rapprochement with other Theosophical groups in what came to be known as the Fraternisation movement. \n\nDuring its first century, Theosophy established itself as an international movement. Campbell believed that from its foundation until 1980, Theosophy had gained tens of thousands of adherents. He noted that in that latter year, there were about 35,000 members of the Adyar-based [ citation needed ] Theosophical Society (9000 of whom were in India), c. 5,500 members of the Theosophical Society in America, c. 1,500 members of the Theosophical Society International (Pasadena), and about 1200 members of the United Lodge of Theosophy. Membership of the Theosophical Society reached its highest peak in 1928, with 45,000 members. The HPB Lodge in Auckland, New Zealand, was one of the world's largest, with over 500 members in 1949. \n\nTheosophical groups consist largely of individuals as opposed to family groups. Campbell noted that these members were alienated in ways from conventional social roles and practices. \n\nAs noted by Dixon, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the Theosophical Society \"appealed above all to an elite, educated, middle- and upper-middle-class constituency\". It was, in her words, \"a religion for the 'thinking classes'.\" Campbell stated that Theosophy attracted \"unconventional, liberal-minded Westerners\", and according to Dixon they were among those \"who constituted themselves as the humanitarian conscience of the middle classes, a dissident minority who worked in a variety of parallel organizations to critique the dominant bourgeois values and culture.\" \n\nCampbell also noted that Theosophy appealed to educated Asians, particularly Indians, because it identified Asia as central to a universal ancient religion and allowed Asians to retain traditional religious beliefs and practices within a modern framework. \n\nHammer and Rothstein believed that the formation and early history of the Theosophical Society was one of the \"pivotal chapters of religious history in the West.\" The Theosophical Society had significant effects on religion, politics, culture, and society. In the Western world, it was a major force for the introduction of Asian religious ideas. In 1980, Campbell described it as \"probably the most important non-traditional or occult group in the last century\", while in 2012 Santucci noted that it had had \"a profound impact on the contemporary religious landscape\". \n\nIn approaching Asian religion with respect and treating its religious beliefs seriously, Blavatsky and Olcott influenced South Asian society. In India, it played an important role in the Indian independence movement and in the Buddhist revival. The Indian independence leader Mahatma Gandhi developed much of his interest in Hindu culture after being given a copy of the Bhagavad Gita by two Theosophists. Alongside her support for Indian home rule, Besant had also supported home rule for Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. Campbell suggested that Theosophy could be seen as a \"grandfather\" movement to this 20th century growth in Asian spirituality. Given the spread of such ideas in the West, some critics have perceived Theosophy's role as being largely obsolete. \n\nMany important figures, in particular within the humanities and the arts, were involved in the Theosophical movement and influenced by its teachings. Prominent scientists who had belonged to the Theosophical Society included the inventor Thomas Edison , the biologist Alfred Russel Wallace , and the chemist William Crookes . \n\nTheosophy also exerted an influence on the arts, and was especially formative for many early pioneers of abstract art . Hilma af Klint 's development of abstraction was directly tied to her work with the Theosophical Society, with the aim of presenting and preserving spiritual concepts visually. The same was true for the Russian expressionist and pioneering abstract painter Wassily Kandinsky , who was interested in Theosophy and Theosophical ideas about colour. The Dutch abstract artist Piet Mondrian was also influenced by Theosophical symbolism. \n\nTheosophical ideas were also an influence on the Irish literary movement of the late 19th and early 20th century, with writers such as Charles Johnston , George Russell , John Eglinton , Charles Weeks , and William Butler Yeats having an interest in the movement. The American adventure fiction writer Talbot Mundy included Theosophical themes in many of his works. He had abandoned his previous allegiance to Christian Science to join the Theosophical faction led by Tingley, joining the Society in 1923 and settling at the Point Loma community. \n\nThe turn-of-the-20th century Russian composer Alexander Scriabin , whose metaphysical and mystical views greatly influenced his tonal system and compositional output, became interested in Theosophy while living in Brussels from 1909–10. [ citation needed ] Other composers whose music was influenced by theosophical concerns include Gustav Holst , Luigi Russolo , Cyril Scott and Edmund Rubbra . \n\nMark Frost cites Theosophy as a direct influence in the writing and creation of the television series Twin Peaks , which itself includes a 'white lodge'. \n\nThe character Obadiah Archer from the Valiant Comics universe series \" Archer & Armstrong \" draws his abilities from Theosophic belief, and the series makes multiple references to Theosophy, Anthroposophy, Völkisch movement and other esoteric schools of thought that believe in the Akashic Plane. The series also ties in the Fascist history of these groups, with a group of connected Nazis living in Tibet. Obadiah Archer is implied to be one of the ascended masters in the Theosophy tradition.\n\nBestsellers and television shows are devoted to Theosophical concepts such as reincarnation and spiritual evolution; the Internet overflows with references to Theosophical concepts such as the human aura (a Google search in May 2012 retrieved 47 million hits) and the chakras (12 million hits). Even truly mainstream media such as the National Geographic Channel present programs devoted to arch-Theosophical themes such as Atlantis, and the spiritual mysteries of Egypt. Terms and ideas created or mediated by spokespersons of the Theosophical Society have over time become household words, and the advent of Theosophy thus marked a fundamental change in the religious lives of countless individuals.\n\nThe founders of many later new religious movements had been involved in Theosophy. Many esoteric groups — such as Alice Bailey's Arcane School and Rudolf Steiner 's Anthroposophy — are \"directly dependent\" on Theosophy. Although he had split from Theosophy when renouncing Leadbeater's statement that he was the World Teacher, Krishnamurti continued to exhibit Theosophical influences in his later teachings. In 1923 a former Theosophist, the Anglo-American Alice Bailey , established the Arcane School , which also rested on beliefs regarding contact with the Ascended Masters. \n\nAnother former Theosophist, the Austrian Rudolf Steiner, split from the Theosophical Society over the statements about Krishnamurti and then established his own Anthroposophical Society in 1913, which promoted Anthroposophy , a philosophy influenced by Theosophical ideas. Rudolf Steiner founded the Anthroposophical Society on 28 December 1912 and he was expelled from the Theosophical Society on 7 March 1913. Despite his departure from the Theosophists, Rudolf Steiner nevertheless maintained a keen interest in Theosophy for the rest of his life. \n\nAs Theosophy entered the Völkisch movement of late 19th century Austria and Germany, it syncretized to form an eclectic occult movement known as Ariosophy . The most prominent Ariosophist, the Austrian Guido von List , was influenced by Theosophical ideas in creating his own occult system. \n\nIn the United States during the 1930s, the I AM group was established by Guy Ballard and Edna Ballard; the group adopted the idea of the Ascended Masters from Theosophy. The idea of the Masters—and a belief in Morya and Kuthumi—have also been adopted into the belief system of the Church Universal and Triumphant . The Canadian mystic Manly P. Hall also cited Blavatsky's writings as a key influence on his ideas. Theosophical ideas, including on the evolution of the Earth, influenced the teachings of British conspiracist David Icke . \n\nHammer and Rothstein stated that Theosophy came to heavily influence \"popular religiosity\" and by the late twentieth and twenty-first centuries was \"permeating just about every nook and cranny of contemporary \"folk\" religious culture\" in Western countries. It was a major influence on the New Age milieu of the latter twentieth century. It played an important role in promoting belief in reincarnation among Westerners. \n\nA considerable amount of literature has been produced on the subject of Theosophy and the Theosophical Society. Most early publications on Theosophy fell into two camps: either apologetic and highly defensive, or highly antagonistic and aggressive towards the movement. As of 2001, the scholar of religion Olav Hammer could still note that books presenting the Theosophical doctrines were mostly apologetic in nature. Examples of such works include William Q. Judge's 1893 book Ocean of Theosophy and Robert Ellwood 's 1986 book Theosophy . He noted that most of these works treated Theosophical doctrine as if it were a fixed entity and provided little or no discussion of how they have changed over the decades. Many articles on the historical development of the movement have also appeared in the journal Theosophical History . \n\nMany early scholars of religion dismissed Theosophy as being not worthy of study; Mircea Eliade for instance described Theosophy as a \"detestable 'spiritual' hybridism\". The academic study of the Theosophical current developed at the intersection of two scholarly sub-fields: the study of new religious movements, which emerged in the 1970s, and the study of Western esotericism. For example, Blavatsky Unveiled Volume 1 by theosophical scholar Moon Laramie provides a modern translation and dispassionate analysis of the first seven chapters of Isis Unveiled .\n\nA significant proportion of the scholarship on Theosophy constitutes biographies of its leading members and discussions of events in the Society's history. In contrast to the significant amount of research focused on the first two generations of Theosophists, little has been produced on later figures. Hammer also lamented that while scholarship on Theosophy was developing, it had not focused on the reformulation of Theosophy by Leadbeater and Besant or with the developing ideas of post-Theosophical writers such as Steiner or Bailey. Hammer and Rothstein suggested that the \"dearth of scholarly literature\" on Theosophy was because \"powerful individuals and institutions\" in Europe and North America regarded the religion as \"ludicrous\", thus discouraging scholars from devoting their time to researching it. ",
  "Body modification (or body alteration ) is the deliberate altering of the human anatomy or human physical appearance . In its broadest definition it includes skin tattooing , socially acceptable decoration ( e.g. , common ear piercing in many societies), and religious rites of passage (e.g., circumcision in a number of cultures), as well as the modern primitive movement.\n\nBody modification is performed for a large variety of reasons, including aesthetics , sexual enhancement, rites of passage, religious beliefs , to display group membership or affiliation, in remembrance of lived experience, traditional symbolism such as axis mundi and mythology , to create body art , for shock value , and as self-expression, among other reasons. \n\nWhat counts as \"body modification\" varies in cultures. In western cultures, the cutting or removal of one's hair is not usually considered body modification. Body modification can be contrasted with body adornment by defining body modification as \"the physical alteration of the physical body [...] can be temporary or permanent, although most are permanent and modify the body forever\". \n\nBiohacking , also referred to as \"bodyhacking,\" represents a subculture of individuals experimenting with the integration of technology and biology to enhance human capabilities. This movement, pioneered by figures like Kevin Warwick , involves practices ranging from inserting magnetic implants for sensory augmentation to developing DIY bionic prosthetics. While some advances, such as brain-connected prosthetic limbs and sensory vests for the deaf, push the boundaries of art and medicine, biohacking remains a controversial field due to ethical concerns and health risks. Advocates believe it could revolutionize human potential, yet its adoption is limited by the challenges of commercial viability and mainstream acceptance. ",
  "Microphotography is a writing style that emerged in the early 1990s in science journalism . The style is named after micrographs and is distinctive for its highly detailed , worm's eye or microscopic view of the macroscopic world.\n\nOne of the flagship works in this style was David Bodanis 's commercially prominent The Secret House: 24 hours in the strange & wonderful world in which we spend our nights and days . This book followed daily life in a typical enclosed human habitat in minute detail, featuring detailed physical and biological explanations.\n\nThis science article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .\n\nThis article about a literary genre is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Crackle is an American-based video streaming service .\n\nGrouper Networks , an encrypted P2P network that integrates file sharing, instant messaging and multimedia streaming, was founded in 2004 by Josh Felser, Dave Samuel, Mike Sitrin, and Aviv Aiyal. Later, Sony purchased it in August 2006 for $65 million. In July 2007, Sony rebranded Grouper as Crackle, a multi-platform video-entertainment network and studio, and in late 2008 appointed Eric Berger as general manager. \n\nIn March 2011, Crackle launched its streaming services on Bravia TVs, the Playstation 3 , Roku boxes , and Sony Blu-ray players. It also partnered with Xbox Live and added its content to Xbox 360. \n\nIn January 2012, Crackle added Animax to its content for users in the US and Canada, and later by the end of March 2013, Animax branding was removed. \n\nIn June 2013, it released an app for the Blackberry 10 platform and added its content to the Apple TV set-top box. \n\nOn April 1, 2014, Sony Pictures Television ceased its Crackle operations in the UK and Australia. In Australia, Crackle became the free-to-air home of Sony's popular American soap opera Days of Our Lives , following the end of its run with the television broadcaster Nine Network . The same month, Crackle announced the creation of Sports Jeopardy! , a sports-themed version of the game show Jeopardy! hosted by Dan Patrick . \n\nOn April 14, 2015, Crackle announced a new feature called \"Always On\"; an ad-supported, internet television channel similar to Vevo TV . Crackle also announced its first animated series, SuperMansion ; their first hour-long scripted drama, The Art of More ; and Joe Dirt 2: Beautiful Loser , a sequel to 2001's Joe Dirt . On October 8, 2015, Crackle premiered SuperMansion , a stop-motion animated comedy television series created by Matthew Senreich and Zeb Wells . The series stars the voices of Bryan Cranston , Heidi Gardner , Tucker Gilmore, Keegan-Michael Key , Tom Root , Yvette Nicole Brown , Wells, and Jillian Bell . \n\nIn 2017, Crackle announced the platform had greenlit an original drama, The Oath , written and created by former Los Angeles County Sheriff's deputy Joe Halpin. Executive produced by Curtis \"50 Cent\" Jackson and his G-Unit Film & Television Inc., the drama series stars Sean Bean , Ryan Kwanten , Cory Hardrict , Arlen Escarpeta , Katrina Law , and J.J. Soria, and premiered on March 8, 2018. \n\nIn spring 2018, the company's name was changed to Sony Crackle. In March 2019, Sony sold its majority stake in Sony Crackle to Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment , and the name was changed to Crackle again. Subsequently, on December 15, 2020, Sony sold its remaining stake in Crackle, giving full control to Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment. \n\nIn April 2023, Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment announced Crackle Connex, its advertising sales division, allowing advertisers to measure and track performance of advertisements on the platform. \n\nOn April 23, 2024, Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment announced a $636.6 million loss in 2023, and warned that without any options to generate additional financing, the company may be forced to liquidate or pause operations, and seek a potential Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection filing. \n\nOn June 29, 2024, the company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection after missing a week of paying its employees and failing to secure financing. \n\nOn July 10, the U.S. Bankruptcy Court approved a conversion of the bankruptcy to Chapter 7, which would signal a liquidation of the company's assets, and the cessation of its subsidiaries, including Crackle. \n\nCrackle is owned by Chicken Soup for the Soul Entertainment. Other Crackle Plus VOD platforms include Popcornflix (AVOD), Truli, and Pivotshare (SVOD platform). Crackle features programming in the following genres: action, comedy, crime, drama, horror, and sci-fi.\n\nCrackle features films and TV shows, some exclusive, mainly from Sony Pictures and its subsidiaries, including Columbia Pictures , TriStar Pictures , Screen Gems , Sony Pictures Classics , and Sony Pictures Worldwide Acquisitions . [ citation needed ]\n\nCrackle also features the \"Crackle Original\" series, including On the Ropes , Going from Broke , Hidden Heroes , The Oath , and Snatch . Crackle's content changes each month as titles are added and taken down. [ citation needed ]\n\nWhile it was Sony Crackle, it was available in 21 countries and in three languages: English , Portuguese , and Spanish . Currently [ as of? ] , Crackle is only available in the US. Crackle was launched in Canada in September 2010. In late 2015, several of the service's original series were made available only through the local services Crave TV and Shomi . Following the closure of Shomi in the fall of 2016, new productions continued to be released exclusively on Crave TV, as well as Amazon Prime Video and Super Channel (Canadian TV channel) . \n\nCrackle's Canadian operations were shut down on June 28, 2018, and its content was moved to Bell Media 's CTV Movies and CTV Throwback services. Despite Crackle being a Sony owned service, the successor CTV app has not launched on Sony's PlayStation or Smart TV platforms, although it has become available on Microsoft's Xbox One console and Samsung's Smart TVs. [ citation needed ]\n\nAs of late 2016, Crackle in Latin America was available only as an ad-free paid service. Subscribers were required to have a pay-TV service provider that had partnered with Sony Crackle in order to access the service. Crackle was discontinued in Latin America on April 30, 2019. ",
  "See text\n\nSus ( / ˈ s uː s / ) is the genus of domestic and wild pigs , within the even-toed ungulate family Suidae . Sus includes domestic pigs ( Sus domesticus ) and their ancestor, the common Eurasian wild boar ( Sus scrofa ), along with various other species. Sus species, like all suids , are native to the Eurasian and African continents , ranging from Europe to the Pacific islands.\n\nJuvenile pigs are known as piglets. Pigs live in complex social groups and are considered one of the more intelligent mammals, as reflected in their ability to learn. \n\nWith around 1 billion of this species alive at any time, the domestic pig is among the most populous large mammals in the world. Pigs are omnivores and can consume a wide range of food. Pigs are biologically similar to humans and are thus frequently used for human medical research . \n\nThe Online Etymology Dictionary provides anecdotal evidence as well as linguistic, saying that the term derives\n\nprobably from Old English * picg , found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally \"young pig\" (the word for adults was swine ). Apparently related to Low German bigge , Dutch big (\"but the phonology is difficult\" -- OED ). ... Another Old English word for \"pig\" was fearh , related to furh \"furrow,\" from PIE * perk - \"dig, furrow\" (source also of Latin porc-us \"pig,\" see pork ). \"This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical attributes or activities\" [Roger Lass]. Synonyms grunter , oinker are from sailors' and fishermen's euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of the Gadarene swine , who drowned. \n\nThe Online Etymology Dictionary also traces the evolution of sow , the term for a female pig, through various historical languages:\n\nOld English sugu , su \"female of the swine,\" from Proto-Germanic * su - (cognates: Old Saxon , Old High German su , German Sau , Dutch zeug , Old Norse syr ), from PIE root * su - (cognates: Sanskrit sukarah \"wild boar, swine;\" Avestan hu \"wild boar;\" Greek hys \"swine;\" Latin sus \"swine\", suinus \"pertaining to swine\"; Old Church Slavonic svinija \"swine;\" Lettish sivens \"young pig;\" Welsh hucc , Irish suig \"swine; Old Irish socc \"snout, plowshare\"), possibly imitative of pig noise; note that Sanskrit sukharah means \"maker of (the sound) su \". \n\nAn adjectival form is porcine . Another adjectival form (technically for the subfamily rather than genus name) is suine (comparable to bovine , canine , etc.); for the family, it is suid (as with bovid , canid ). \n\nA typical pig has a large head with a long snout that is strengthened by a special prenasal bone and by a disk of cartilage at the tip. The snout is used to dig into the soil to find food and is a very acute sense organ. Each foot has four hooves with the two larger central toes bearing most of the weight, and the outer two also being used in soft ground. \n\nThe dental formula of adult pigs is 3.1.4.3 3.1.4.3 , giving a total of 44 teeth . The rear teeth are adapted for crushing. In the male, the canine teeth form tusks , which grow continuously and are sharpened by constantly being ground against each other. \n\nOccasionally, captive mother pigs may savage their own piglets, often if they become severely stressed. Some attacks on newborn piglets are non-fatal. Others may kill the piglets and sometimes, the mother may eat them. An estimated 50% of piglet fatalities are due to the mother attacking, or unintentionally crushing, the newborn pre-weaned animals. \n\nWith around 1 billion individuals alive at any time, the domestic pig is one of the most numerous large mammals on the planet. \n\nThe ancestor of the domestic pig is the wild boar , which is one of the most numerous and widespread large mammals. Its many subspecies are native to all but the harshest climates of continental Eurasia and its islands and Africa as well, from Ireland and India to Japan and north to Siberia.\n\nLong isolated from other pigs on the many islands of Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines, pigs have evolved into many different species, including wild boar, bearded pigs, and warty pigs. Humans have introduced pigs into Australia, North and South America, and numerous islands, either accidentally as escaped domestic pigs which have gone feral , or as wild boar.\n\nThe wild boar ( Sus scrofa ) can take advantage of any forage resources. Therefore, they can live in virtually any productive habitat that can provide enough water to sustain large mammals such as pigs. Pigs are famously fecund; when well-fed, a sow can birth twelve or more piglets in her annual litter. If there is increased foraging by wild boars in certain areas, they can cause a nutritional shortage which can cause the pig population to decrease. If the nutritional state returns to normal, the pig population will most likely rise due to the pigs' naturally-increased reproduction rate. \n\nPigs are omnivores , which means that they consume both plants and animals. In the wild, they are foragers , searching through their habitat for food (which, for pigs, often includes digging with their snouts). Wild pigs eat roots, tubers, leaves, fruits, mushrooms, and flowers, in addition to some insects (especially insect grubs) and fish. Pigs are famously fond of truffle mushrooms , which grow underground; pigs find them by scent and unearth them with their snouts. In Europe , trained \"truffle pigs\" find these valuable fungi for humans. Pigs do not hunt, but will readily eat carrion, eggs, and other animal foods that they can find. As livestock, pigs were once fed all manner of mixed household food scraps (called \"slops\"), but on large modern farms are now fed mostly corn and soybean meal with a mixture of vitamins and minerals added. Traditionally, pigs were raised on dairy farms and fed any excess milk and the whey left over from cheese and butter making. Pigs brought so much extra income to these farms that they earned the nickname \"mortgage lifters\". Older pigs will consume three to five gallons of water per day. When kept as pets, the optimal healthy diet consists mainly of a balanced diet of raw vegetables, although some may give their pigs commercial mini pig pellet feed. \n\nMost pigs today are domesticated pigs raised for meat (known as pork ). Miniature breeds are commonly kept as pets. Because of their foraging abilities and excellent sense of smell , people in many European countries use them to find truffles . Both wild and feral pigs are commonly hunted .\n\nApart from meat, pig skin is turned into leather , and their hairs are used to make brushes. The relatively short, stiff, coarse pig hairs are called bristles , and were once so commonly used in paintbrushes that in 1946 the Australian Government launched Operation Pig Bristle . In May 1946, in response to a shortage of pig bristles for paintbrushes to paint houses in the post-World War II construction boom, the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) flew in 28 short tons of pig bristles from China, their only commercially available source at the time. \n\nHuman skin is very similar to pig skin, therefore many preclinical studies employ pig skin. In addition to providing use in biomedical research and for drug testing, genetic advances in human healthcare have provided a pathway for domestic pigs to become xenotransplantation candidates for humans. \n\nThe genus Sus is currently thought to contain nine living species. Several extinct species ( † ) are known from fossils .\n\nPigs have been domesticated since ancient times in the Old World . Pigs were domesticated on each end of Eurasia, and possibly several times. It is now thought that pigs were attracted to human settlements for the food scraps, and that the process of domestication began as a commensal relationship. Archaeological evidence suggests that pigs were being managed in the wild in a way similar to the way they are managed by some modern New Guineans from wild boar as early as 13,000–12,700 BP in the Near East in the Tigris Basin, Çayönü , Cafer Höyük , Nevalı Çori . Remains of pigs have been dated to earlier than 11,400 BP in Cyprus that must have been introduced from the mainland which suggests domestication in the adjacent mainland by then. \n\nPigs were also domesticated in China, potentially more than once. In some parts of China pigs were kept in pens from early times, separating them from wild populations and allowing farmers to create breeds that were fatter and bred more quickly. Early Modern Europeans brought these breeds back home and crossed them with their own pigs, which was the origins of most modern pig breeds. \n\nIn India, pigs have been domesticated for a long time mostly in Goa and some rural areas for pig toilets . This practice also occurred in China. Though ecologically logical as well as economical, pig toilets are waning in popularity as use of septic tanks and/or sewerage systems is increasing in rural areas.\n\nHernando de Soto and other early Spanish explorers brought pigs to southeastern North America from Europe. As in medieval Europe, pigs are valued on certain oceanic islands for their self-sufficiency, which allows them to be turned loose, although the practice does have drawbacks (see environmental impact ).\n\nThe domestic pig ( Sus domesticus ) is usually given the scientific name Sus scrofa domesticus , although some taxonomists, including the American Society of Mammalogists , call it S. domesticus , reserving S. scrofa for the wild boar . It was domesticated approximately 5,000 to 7,000 years ago. The upper canines form sharp distinctive tusks that curve outward and upward. Compared to other artiodactyles, their head is relatively long, pointed, and free of warts . Their head and body length ranges from 0.9 to 1.8 m (35 to 71 in) and they can weigh between 50 and 350 kg (110 and 770 lb).\n\nIn November 2012, scientists managed to sequence the genome of the domestic pig . The similarities between the pig and human genomes mean that the new data may have wide applications in the study and treatment of human genetic diseases. \n\nIn August 2015, a study looked at over 100 pig genome sequences to ascertain their process of domestication. The process of domestication was assumed to have been initiated by humans, involved few individuals and relied on reproductive isolation between wild and domestic forms. The study found that the assumption of reproductive isolation with population bottlenecks was not supported. The study indicated that pigs were domesticated separately in Western Asia and China, with Western Asian pigs introduced into Europe where they crossed with wild boar. A model that fitted the data included admixture with a now extinct ghost population of wild pigs during the Pleistocene . The study also found that despite back-crossing with wild pigs, the genomes of domestic pigs have strong signatures of selection at DNA loci that affect behavior and morphology. The study concluded that human selection for domestic traits likely counteracted the homogenizing effect of gene flow from wild boars and created domestication islands in the genome. The same process may also apply to other domesticated animals. \n\nPigs have been important in culture across the world since Neolithic times. They appear in art , literature, and religion . In Asia the wild boar is one of 12 animal images comprising the Chinese zodiac , while in Europe the boar represents a standard charge in heraldry . In Islam and Judaism pigs and those who handle them are viewed negatively, and the consumption of pork is forbidden. Pigs are alluded to in animal epithets and proverbs . The pig has been celebrated throughout Europe since ancient times in its carnivals , the name coming from the Italian carne levare , the lifting of meat. \n\nPigs have been brought into literature for varying reasons, ranging from the pleasures of eating, as in Charles Lamb 's A Dissertation upon Roast Pig , to William Golding 's Lord of the Flies (with the fat character \"Piggy\"), where the rotting boar's head on a stick represents Beelzebub , \"lord of the flies\" being the direct translation of the Hebrew בעל זבוב , and George Orwell 's allegorical novel Animal Farm , where the central characters, representing Soviet leaders, are all pigs. \n\nDomestic pigs that have escaped from urban areas or were allowed to forage in the wild, and in some cases wild boars which were introduced as prey for hunting, have given rise to large populations of feral pigs in North and South America, Australia, New Zealand, Hawaii, and other areas where pigs are not native. Accidental or deliberate releases of pigs into countries or environments where they are an alien species have caused extensive environmental change. Their omnivorous diet, aggressive behaviour, and their feeding method of rooting in the ground all combine to severely alter ecosystems unused to pigs. Pigs will even eat small animals and destroy nests of ground nesting birds. The Invasive Species Specialist Group lists feral pigs on the list of the world's 100 worst invasive species and says: \n\nFeral pigs like other introduced mammals are major drivers of extinction and ecosystem change. They have been introduced into many parts of the world, and will damage crops and home gardens as well as potentially spreading disease. They uproot large areas of land, eliminating native vegetation and spreading weeds. This results in habitat alteration, a change in plant succession and composition and a decrease in native fauna dependent on the original habitat.\n\nBecause of their biological similarities, pigs can harbour a range of parasites and diseases that can be transmitted to humans. Examples of such zoonoses include trichinosis , Taenia solium , cysticercosis , and brucellosis . Pigs also host large concentrations of parasitic ascarid worms in their digestive tracts. \n\nSome strains of influenza are endemic in pigs, the most significant of which are H1N1 , H1N2 , and H3N2 , the first of which has caused several outbreaks among humans, including the Spanish flu , 1977 Russian flu pandemic , and the 2009 swine flu pandemic . Pigs also can acquire human influenza . ",
  "A minor party is a political party that plays a smaller (in some cases much smaller, even insignificant in comparison) role than a major party in a country's politics and elections. The difference between minor and major parties can be so great that the membership total, donations, and the candidates that they are able to produce or attract are very distinct. Some of the minor parties play almost no role in a country's politics because of their low recognition, vote and donations. Minor parties often receive very small numbers of votes at an election (to the point of losing any candidate nomination deposit). The method of voting can also assist or hinder a minor party's chances. For example, in an election for more than one member, the proportional representation method of voting can be advantageous to a minor party as can preference allocation from one or both of the major parties. [ citation needed ]\n\nA minor party that follows the direction/directive of some other major parties is called a bloc party or satellite party.\n\nMinor parties in Australia owe much of their success to the proportional representation method of voting for the Australian Senate and one chamber of the legislatures of most states . This allows minor parties to achieve at least one quota in the electorate or state and thus gain representation in a parliamentary chamber. Often minor parties have been so successful in gaining such representation that they are able to hold the balance of power in the particular house of the parliament. Some examples are the Democratic Labor Party (DLP) in the 1960s and early 1970s, the Australian Democrats from the late 1970s until 2004, and more recently the Australian Greens . [ citation needed ]\n\nGermany uses a form of proportional representation for its federal elections, with a threshold of 5% to qualify for seats, or alternatively 3 direct mandates. Thus, there are many minor parties which regularly fail to reach the 5% mark federally. These include the Free Voters , Die PARTEI , the National Democratic Party of Germany and the Human Environment Animal Protection Party .\n\nMinor political parties are commonly referred to as partai gurem ( gurem being the Indonesian term for a type of mite ) in Indonesia. In Indonesia's first democratic election in 1955 , over a dozen newly established political parties which participated in elections won just two seats or less in the House of Representatives . During most of Suharto's presidency, only three political parties participated in elections, but after Suharto's fall minor parties returned to the Indonesian electoral scene. In the 1999 election , for example, out of 48 participating political parties only 20 political parties won any seats at the national level. Since the 2009 election , a parliamentary threshold has been implemented in Indonesian elections, reducing the number of parties represented in the national parliament to ten or less. \n\nThe use of first past the post in the United Kingdom means that in the post-War era, only two parties have had a majority in parliament: the Conservative Party and the Labour Party . However, strong regionalist movements and the potential for parties to take votes in the centre or extreme fringes of the political spectrum mean that minor parties still play a significant and increasing role in British politics. The Liberal Democrats , and their predecessors the SDP–Liberal Alliance and the Liberal Party (the main opposition to the Conservative Party before the rise of Labour, forming governments six times between 1859 and 1918) have achieved significant numbers of seats and have occasionally been kingmakers (such as during the Lib-Lab pacts and the 2010–2015 coalition with the Conservatives ) and are sometimes also classed as a major party. The nationalist Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru hold a significant number of seats in their Home Nations, with the SNP controlling 56 of 59 Scottish Westminster seats at the 2015 United Kingdom general election , and every single Northern Irish seat is held by a regional party – either the republican Sinn Féin and Social Democratic and Labour Party , or the unionist Ulster Unionist Party and Democratic Unionist Party . As of 2024, the Green Party hold four seats and the Brexit Party , which was the largest British party in the European Parliament before withdrawing due to Brexit, held no seats in the House of Commons. Today The Brexit Party is known as Reform UK and has five seats. Also UKIP has achieved significant vote shares despite holding no seats in the Commons. [ citation needed ]\n\nOther parties that have held seats in devolved assemblies, the House of Commons or the European Parliament in the 21st century include the non-sectarian Northern Irish Alliance Party , the far right British National Party , the healthcare-focused Independent Community and Health Concern , the cross-community Northern Irish NI21 , the cross-community feminist Northern Ireland Women's Coalition , the anti-austerity People Before Profit Alliance , the left-wing Northern Irish unionist Progressive Unionist Party , the left wing Respect Party , the left wing nationalist Scottish Socialist Party , the elderly interest Scottish Senior Citizens Unity Party and the unionist Northern Irish Traditional Unionist Voice and UK Unionist Party . [ citation needed ]\n\nWhether or not a party counts as a major party is a sometimes heated argument, since \"major parties\" as defined by Ofcom are entitled to more party political broadcasts than minor ones. Because of the regionalist nature of many parties, it is possible to be a major party in one part of the country and not another: for example, at one point UKIP was officially a major party in England and Wales, but a minor one in Scotland. No mainland British party is classed as a major party in Northern Ireland. \n\nA minor party is also a special type of political party registered with the Electoral Commission in Great Britain that is able to contest only parish and community council elections in England and Wales and has fewer reporting, financial and administrative requirements than an ordinary registered political party. \n\nIn the United States , minor parties are often described as third parties . Minor parties in the U.S. include the Libertarian Party , the Green Party , Constitution Party , and others that have less influence than the major parties. Since the American Civil War (1861–1865), the major parties have been the Republican Party and the Democratic Party . Since 1860, six presidential candidates other than Republicans and Democrats have received over 10% of the popular vote, although one of them was a former president, Theodore Roosevelt . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn electoral politics, a third party is any party contending for votes that failed to outpoll either of its two strongest rivals (or, in the context of an impending election, is considered highly unlikely to do so). The distinction is particularly significant in two-party systems . In any case \"third\" is often used figuratively, as in \"the third parties\", where the intent, literally stated, is \"the third and succeeding parties\". [ citation needed ] The term \"third parties\" is used mostly in countries with first-past-the-post voting systems, as those systems tend to create a two-party system , so that successful smaller parties are rare.\n\nCountries using proportional representation give little advantage to the two largest parties, so they tend to elect many parties. Therefore, in those countries, three, four, or more political parties are usually elected to legislatures. In such parliamentary systems, coalitions often include smaller parties; since they may participate in a coalition government, there is not a sharp distinction with a 'major' party. In two-party systems, on the other hand, only the major parties have a serious chance of forming a government. Similarly, in presidential systems, third-party candidates are rarely elected president.\n\nIn some categorizations, a party needs to have a certain level of success to be considered a third party. Smaller parties that win only a very small share of the vote and no seats in the legislature often are termed minor or fringe parties. [ citation needed ]\n\nThird parties usually have little chance of forming a government or winning the position of head of government. Nevertheless, there are many reasons for third parties to compete. The opportunity of a national election means that attention will be paid to the positions of third parties. The larger parties might be forced to respond and adapt to their challenges, and often the larger parties copy ideas from them. Most third parties try to build their support to become one of the dominant parties, as the Labour Party in Britain and New Democratic Party in Canada did.\n\nIn the Westminster system there is also the possibility of minority governments , which can give smaller parties strength disproportional to their support. Examples include the Irish Parliamentary Party which pushed for Home Rule in Ireland in the late 19th century.\n\nChallenging parties also usually appeal for votes on the basis that they will try to change the voting system to make it more competitive for all parties. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn some countries like the United States, parties with low win probability face frequent exclusion from major debates and media coverage and denial of ballot access as well as hamstrung campaign budgets. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Democratic Labor Party (DLP) was the largest Third party by popular vote in federal elections from 1955 until 1977. The Australian Democrats was the largest Third party by popular vote in federal elections from 1977 until 2004.\n\nSince 2004, the Australian Greens have been largest Third party by popular vote in federal elections.\n\nIn the United States, there have been numerous \"third parties\". The largest since the mid-20th century are the Libertarian and Green Parties. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn the United Kingdom, a third party is a national political party, other than the Conservatives and Labour , which has at least one member in the House of Commons . From 1922 to 2015 and again from 2024, the Liberal Democrats and their predecessors the Liberals were the third party. Between 2015 and 2024, it was used for the Scottish National Party . In the Scottish Parliament, the SNP has been the dominant parliamentary party beginning with the 2011 Scottish Parliament election , with the Conservatives the next largest party and Labour becoming Scotland's third party ever since. [ citation needed ]\n\nReform UK was the largest Third party by popular vote in the 2024 United Kingdom general election . In the 2015 United Kingdom general election UKIP was the largest Third party by popular vote. The Liberal Democrats and their predecessors the Liberals used to be the largest Third party by popular vote from the 1920s until 2015.\n\nIn Canada , the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party are the two major parties at the federal level. The Bloc Québécois , New Democratic Party , and Green Party are the largest minor parties, represented in the House of Commons of Canada . Another 12 parties are registered with Elections Canada (see List of federal political parties in Canada#Registered parties ) but have no seats in Parliament.\n\nThe New Democratic Party has been the largest Third party by popular vote in most federal elections since 1962.\n\nUnlike the parties in many nations, Canadian parties at the federal level are often only loosely connected with parties at the provincial level. Some parties operate only at the provincial level, for example BC United in British Columbia .",
  "Cheerleading is an activity in which the participants (called cheerleaders ) cheer for their team as a form of encouragement. It can range from chanting slogans to intense physical activity . It can be performed to motivate sports teams, to entertain the audience, or for competition. Cheerleading routines typically range anywhere from one to three minutes, and contain components of tumbling , dance , jumps , cheers , and stunting . Cheerleading originated in the United States , where it has become a tradition. It is less prevalent in the rest of the world, except via its association with American sports or organized cheerleading contests.\n\nModern cheerleading is very closely associated with American football and basketball . Sports such as association football (soccer), ice hockey , volleyball , baseball , and wrestling will sometimes sponsor cheerleading squads. The ICC Twenty20 Cricket World Cup in South Africa in 2007 was the first international cricket event to have cheerleaders. Some Brazilian association football (soccer) teams that plays in the Brazilian Serie A have cheerleading squads, such as Bahia , Fortaleza and Botafogo . In baseball, the Florida Marlins were the first Major League Baseball team to have a cheerleading team.\n\nCheerleading originated as an all-male activity in the United States, and is popular predominantly in America, with an estimated 3.85 million participants in 2017. The global presentation of cheerleading was led by the 1997 broadcast of ESPN 's International cheerleading competition, and the worldwide release of the 2000 film Bring It On . The International Cheer Union (ICU) now claims 116 member nations with an estimated 7.5 million participants worldwide. \n\nAround the end of the 2000s , the sport had gained traction outside of the United States in countries like Australia, Canada, Mexico, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Germany, Japan , the Netherlands, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. However, the sport does not have the international popularity of other American sports, such as baseball or basketball , despite efforts being made to popularize the sport at an international level. In 2016, the IOC ( International Olympic Committee ) recognized the ICU (International Cheer Union) as part of the sports federations; in practice this means that the modality is considered a sport by the IOC, and in the future, depending on negotiations and international popularization, it could become part of the Olympic Games .\n\nScientific studies of cheerleading show that it carries the highest rate of catastrophic injuries to female athletes in sports, with most injuries associated with stunting , also known as pyramids. One 2011 study of American female athletes showed that cheerleading resulted in 65% of all catastrophic injuries in female sports. \n\nIn the 1860s, students from Great Britain began to cheer and chant in unison for their favorite athletes at sporting events. Soon, that gesture of support crossed overseas to America. \n\nOn November 6, 1869, the United States witnessed its first intercollegiate football game. It took place between Princeton University and Rutgers University , and marked the day the original \"Sis Boom Rah!\" cheer was shouted out by student fans. \n\nOrganized cheerleading began as an all-male activity. As early as 1877, Princeton University had a \"Princeton Cheer\", documented in the February 22, 1877, March 12, 1880, and November 4, 1881, issues of The Daily Princetonian . This cheer was yelled from the stands by students attending games, as well as by the athletes themselves. The cheer, \"Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah! Tiger! S-s-s-t! Boom! A-h-h-h!\" remains in use with slight modifications today, where it is now referred to as the \"Locomotive\". \n\nPrinceton class of 1882 graduate Thomas Peebles moved to Minnesota in 1884. He transplanted the idea of organized crowds cheering at football games to the University of Minnesota . \n\nThe term \"Cheer Leader\" had been used as early as 1897, with Princeton's football officials having named three students as Cheer Leaders: Thomas, Easton, and Guerin from Princeton's classes of 1897, 1898, and 1899, respectively, on October 26, 1897. These students would cheer for the team also at football practices, and special cheering sections were designated in the stands for the games themselves for both the home and visiting teams. \n\nIt was not until 1898 that University of Minnesota student Johnny Campbell directed a crowd in cheering \"Rah, Rah, Rah! Ski-u-mah, Hoo-Rah! Hoo-Rah! Varsity! Varsity! Varsity, Minn-e-So-Tah!\", making Campbell the very first cheerleader. \n\nNovember 2, 1898, is the official birth date of organized cheerleading. Soon after, the University of Minnesota organized a \"yell leader\" squad of six male students, who still use Campbell's original cheer today. \n\nIn 1903, the first cheerleading fraternity , Gamma Sigma, was founded. \n\nIn 1923, at the University of Minnesota , women were permitted to participate in cheerleading. However, it took time for other schools to follow. In the late 1920s, many school manuals and newspapers that were published still referred to cheerleaders as \"chap\", \"fellow\", and \"man\". \n\nWomen cheerleaders were overlooked until the 1940s when collegiate men were drafted for World War II , creating the opportunity for more women to make their way onto sporting event sidelines. As noted by Kieran Scott in Ultimate Cheerleading : \"Girls really took over for the first time.\" \n\nIn 1949, Lawrence Herkimer , a former cheerleader at Southern Methodist University and inventor of the herkie jump, founded his first cheerleading camp in Huntsville, Texas. 52 girls were in attendance. The clinic was so popular that Herkimer was asked to hold a second, where 350 young women were in attendance. Herkimer also patented the pom-pom .\n\nIn 1951, Herkimer created the National Cheerleading Association to help grow the activity and provide cheerleading education to schools around the country. \n\nDuring the 1950s, female participation in cheerleading continued to grow. An overview written on behalf of cheerleading in 1955 explained that in larger schools, \"occasionally boys as well as girls are included\", and in smaller schools, \"boys can usually find their place in the athletic program, and cheerleading is likely to remain solely a feminine occupation\". Cheerleading could be found at almost every school level across the country; even pee wee and youth leagues began to appear. \n\nIn the 1950s, professional cheerleading also began. The first recorded cheer squad in National Football League (NFL) history was for the Baltimore Colts . Professional cheerleaders put a new perspective on American cheerleading. Women were exclusively chosen for dancing ability as well as to conform to the male gaze , as heterosexual men were the targeted marketing group. \n\nBy the 1960s, college cheerleaders employed by the NCA were hosting workshops across the nation, teaching fundamental cheer skills to tens of thousands of high-school-age girls. Herkimer also contributed many notable firsts to cheerleading: the founding of a cheerleading uniform supply company, inventing the herkie jump (where one leg is bent towards the ground as if kneeling and the other is out to the side as high as it will stretch in toe-touch position), and creating the \"Spirit Stick\". \n\nIn 1965, Fred Gastoff invented the vinyl pom-pom , which was introduced into competitions by the International Cheerleading Foundation (ICF, now the World Cheerleading Association, or WCA). Organized cheerleading competitions began to pop up with the first ranking of the \"Top Ten College Cheerleading Squads\" and \"Cheerleader All America\" awards given out by the ICF in 1967.\n\nThe Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders soon gained the spotlight with their revealing outfits and sophisticated dance moves, debuting in the 1972–1973 season, but were first widely seen in Super Bowl X (1976). These pro squads of the 1970s established cheerleaders as \"American icons of wholesome sex appeal .\" \n\nIn 1975, Randy Neil estimated that over 500,000 students actively participated in American cheerleading from elementary school to the collegiate level. Neil also approximated that ninety-five percent of cheerleaders within America were female. \n\nIn 1978, America was introduced to competitive cheerleading by the first broadcast of Collegiate Cheerleading Championships on CBS . \n\nThe 1980s saw the beginning of modern cheerleading, adding difficult stunt sequences and gymnastics into routines. All-star teams, or those not affiliated with a school, popped up, and eventually led to the creation of the U.S. All Star Federation (USASF). ESPN first broadcast the National High School Cheerleading Competition nationwide in 1983.\n\nBy 1981, a total of seventeen Nation Football League teams had their own cheerleaders. The only teams without NFL cheerleaders at this time were New Orleans, New York, Detroit, Cleveland, Denver, Minnesota, Pittsburgh, San Francisco, and San Diego. Professional cheerleading eventually spread to soccer and basketball teams as well. \n\nCheerleading organizations such as the American Association of Cheerleading Coaches and Advisors (AACCA), founded in 1987, started applying universal safety standards to decrease the number of injuries and prevent dangerous stunts, pyramids, and tumbling passes from being included in the cheerleading routines. In 2003, the National Council for Spirit Safety and Education (NCSSE) was formed to offer safety training for youth, school, all-star, and college coaches. The NCAA now requires college cheer coaches to successfully complete a nationally recognized safety-training program.\n\nEven with its athletic and competitive development, cheerleading at the school level has retained its ties to its spirit leading traditions. Cheerleaders are quite often seen as ambassadors for their schools, and leaders among the student body. At the college level, cheerleaders are often invited to help at university fundraisers and events. \n\nDebuting in 2003, the \"Marlin Mermaids\" gained national exposure, and have influenced other MLB teams to develop their own cheer/dance squads. \n\nIn 2005, overall statistics show around 97% of all modern cheerleading participants are female, although at the collegiate level, cheerleading is co-ed with about 50% of participants being male. Modern male cheerleaders' stunts focus less on flexibility and more on tumbling, flips, pikes, and handstands. These depend on strong legs and strong core strength. \n\nIn 2019, Napoleon Jinnies and Quinton Peron became the first male cheerleaders in the history of the NFL to perform at the Super Bowl . \n\nKristi Yamaoka, a cheerleader for Southern Illinois University, suffered a fractured vertebra when she hit her head after falling from a human pyramid . She also suffered from a concussion, and a bruised lung. The fall occurred when Yamaoka lost her balance during a basketball game between Southern Illinois University and Bradley University at the Savvis Center in St. Louis on March 5, 2006. The fall gained \"national attention\", because Yamaoka continued to perform from a stretcher as she was moved away from the game. \n\nThe accident caused the Missouri Valley Conference to ban its member schools from allowing cheerleaders to be \"launched or tossed and from taking part in formations higher than two levels\" for one week during a women's basketball conference tournament, and also resulted in a recommendation by the NCAA that conferences and tournaments do not allow pyramids two and one half levels high or higher, and a stunt known as basket tosses, during the rest of the men's and women's basketball season. On July 11, 2006, the bans were made permanent by the AACCA rules committee:\n\nThe committee unanimously voted for sweeping revisions to cheerleading safety rules, the most major of which restricts specific upper-level skills during basketball games. Basket tosses, 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 high pyramids, one-arm stunts, stunts that involve twisting or flipping, and twisting tumbling skills may be performed only during halftime and post-game on a matted surface and are prohibited during game play or time-outs. \n\nMost American elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, and colleges have organized cheerleading squads. Some colleges even offer cheerleading scholarships for students. A school cheerleading team may compete locally, regionally, or nationally, but their main purpose is typically to cheer for sporting events and encourage audience participation. Cheerleading is quickly becoming a year-round activity, starting with tryouts during the spring semester of the preceding school year. Teams may attend organized summer cheerleading camps and practices to improve skills and create routines for competition.\n\nIn addition to supporting their schools' football or other sports teams, student cheerleaders may compete with recreational-style routine at competitions year-round.\n\nIn far more recent years, it has become more common for elementary schools to have an organized cheerleading team. This is a great way to get younger children introduced to the sport and used to being crowd leaders. Also, with young children learning so much so quickly, tumbling can come very easy to a child in elementary school. \n\nMiddle school cheerleading evolved shortly after high school squads were created and is set at the district level. In middle school, cheerleading squads serve the same purpose, but often follow a modified set of rules from high school squads with possible additional rules. Squads can cheer for basketball teams, football teams, and other sports teams in their school. Squads may also perform at pep rallies and compete against other local schools from the area. Cheerleading in middle school sometimes can be a two-season activity: fall and winter. However, many middle school cheer squads will go year-round like high school squads. Middle school cheerleaders use the same cheerleading movements as their older counterparts, yet may perform less extreme stunts and tumbling elements, depending on the rules in their area. [ citation needed ] .\n\nIn high school, there are usually two squads per school: varsity and a junior varsity . High school cheerleading contains aspects of school spirit as well as competition. These squads have become part of a year-round cycle. Starting with tryouts in the spring, year-round practice, cheering on teams in the fall and winter , and participating in cheerleading competitions. Most squads practice at least three days a week for about two hours each practice during the summer. [ citation needed ] Many teams also attend separate tumbling sessions outside of practice. During the school year, cheerleading is usually practiced five- to six-days-a-week. During competition season, it often becomes seven days with practice twice a day sometimes. The school spirit aspect of cheerleading involves cheering, supporting, and \"hyping up\" the crowd at football games, basketball games, and even at wrestling meets. Along with this, cheerleaders usually perform at pep rallies, and bring school spirit to other students. In May 2009, the National Federation of State High School Associations released the results of their first true high school participation study. They estimated that the number of high school cheerleaders from public high schools is around 394,700. \n\nThere are different cheerleading organizations that put on competitions; some of the major ones include state and regional competitions. Many high schools will often host cheerleading competitions, bringing in IHSA judges. The regional competitions are qualifiers for national competitions, such as the UCA (Universal Cheerleaders Association) in Orlando , Florida , every year. Many teams have a professional choreographer that choreographs their routine in order to ensure they are not breaking rules or regulations and to give the squad creative elements.\n\nMost American universities have a cheerleading squad to cheer for football, basketball, volleyball, wrestling, and soccer. Most college squads tend to be larger coed teams, although in recent years; all-girl squads and smaller college squads have increased rapidly. Cheerleading is not recognized by NCAA, NAIA, and NJCAA as athletics; therefore, there are few to no scholarships offered to athletes wanting to pursue cheerleading at the collegiate level. However, some community colleges and universities offer scholarships directly from the program or sponsorship funds. Some colleges offer scholarships for an athlete's talents, academic excellence, and/or involvement in community events.\n\nCollege squads perform more difficult stunts which include multi-level pyramids, as well as flipping and twisting basket tosses.\n\nNot only do college cheerleaders cheer on the other sports at their university, many teams at universities compete with other schools at either UCA College Nationals or NCA College Nationals. This requires the teams to choreograph a 2-minute and 30 second routine that includes elements of jumps, tumbling, stunting, basket tosses, pyramids, and a crowd involvement section. Winning one of these competitions is a very prestigious accomplishment, and is seen as another national title for most schools.\n\nOrganizations that sponsor youth cheer teams usually sponsor either youth league football or basketball teams as well. This allows for the two, under the same sponsor, to be intermingled. Both teams have the same mascot name and the cheerleaders will perform at their football or basketball games. Examples of such sponsors include Pop Warner , American Youth Football , and the YMCA . The purpose of these squads is primarily to support their associated football or basketball players, but some teams do compete at local or regional competitions. The Pop Warner Association even hosts a national championship each December for teams in their program who qualify.\n\n\"All-star\" or club cheerleading differs from school or sideline cheerleading because all-star teams focus solely on performing a competition routine and not on leading cheers for other sports teams. All-star cheerleaders are members of a privately owned gym or club which they typically pay dues or tuition to, similar to a gymnastics gym.\n\nDuring the early 1980s, cheerleading squads not associated with a school or sports league, whose main objective was competition, began to emerge. The first organization to call themselves all-stars were the Q94 Rockers from Richmond, Virginia , founded in 1982. All-star teams competing prior to 1987 were placed into the same divisions as teams that represented schools and sports leagues. In 1986, the National Cheerleaders Association (NCA) addressed this situation by creating a separate division for teams lacking a sponsoring school or athletic association, calling it the All-Star Division and debuting it at their 1987 competitions. As the popularity of this type of team grew, more and more of them were formed, attending competitions sponsored by many different organizations and companies, each using its own set of rules, regulations, and divisions. This situation became a concern to coaches and gym owners, as the inconsistencies caused coaches to keep their routines in a constant state of flux, detracting from time that could be better utilized for developing skills and providing personal attention to their athletes. More importantly, because the various companies were constantly vying for a competitive edge, safety standards had become more and more lax. In some cases, unqualified coaches and inexperienced squads were attempting dangerous stunts as a result of these expanded sets of rules. \n\nThe United States All Star Federation (USASF) was formed in 2003 by the competition companies to act as the national governing body for all star cheerleading and to create a standard set of rules and judging criteria to be followed by all competitions sanctioned by the Federation. Eager to grow the sport and create more opportunities for high-level teams, The USASF hosted the first Cheerleading Worlds on April 24, 2004. At the same time, cheerleading coaches from all over the country organized themselves for the same rule making purpose, calling themselves the National All Star Cheerleading Coaches Congress (NACCC). In 2005, the NACCC was absorbed by the USASF to become their rule making body. In late 2006, the USASF facilitated the creation of the International All-Star Federation (IASF), which now governs club cheerleading worldwide.\n\nAll-star cheerleading, as sanctioned by the USASF, involves a squad of 5–36 females and males. All-star cheerleaders are placed into divisions, which are grouped based upon age, size of the team, gender of participants, and ability level. The age groups vary from under 4 years of age to 18 years and over. The squad prepares year-round for many different competition appearances, but they actually perform only for up to 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 minutes during their team's routine. The numbers of competitions a team participates in varies from team to team, but generally, most teams tend to participate in six to ten competitions a year. These competitions include locals or regionals, which normally take place in school gymnasiums or local venues, nationals, hosted in large venues all around the U.S., and the Cheerleading Worlds, which takes place at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Florida . During a competition routine, a squad performs carefully choreographed stunting, tumbling, jumping, and dancing to their own custom music. Teams create their routines to an eight-count system and apply that to the music so that the team members execute the elements with precise timing and synchronization.\n\nAll-star cheerleaders compete at competitions hosted by private event production companies, the foremost of these being Varsity Spirit. Varsity Spirit is the parent company for many subsidiaries including The National Cheerleader's Association, The Universal Cheerleader's Association, AmeriCheer, Allstar Challenge, and JamFest, among others. Each separate company or subsidiary typically hosts their own local and national level competitions. This means that many gyms within the same area could be state and national champions for the same year and never have competed against each other. Currently, there is no system in place that awards only one state or national title.\n\nJudges at a competition watch closely for illegal skills from the group or any individual member. Here, an illegal skill is something that is not allowed in that division due to difficulty or safety restrictions. They look out for deductions, or things that go wrong, such as a dropped stunt or a tumbler who does not stick a landing. More generally, judges look at the difficulty and execution of jumps, stunts and tumbling, synchronization, creativity, the sharpness of the motions, showmanship, and overall routine execution.\n\nIf a level 6 or 7 team places high enough at selected USASF/IASF sanctioned national competitions, they could earn a place at the Cheerleading Worlds and compete against teams from all over the world, as well as receive money for placing. For elite level cheerleaders, The Cheerleading Worlds is the highest level of competition to which they can aspire, and winning a world championship title is an incredible honor.\n\nProfessional cheerleaders and dancers cheer for sports such as football , basketball , baseball , wrestling , or hockey . There are only a small handful of professional cheerleading leagues around the world; some professional leagues include the NBA Cheerleading League , the NFL Cheerleading League , the CFL Cheerleading League, the MLS Cheerleading League, the MLB Cheerleading League, and the NHL Ice Girls. Although professional cheerleading leagues exist in multiple countries, there are no Olympic teams . \n\nIn addition to cheering at games and competing, professional cheerleaders often do a lot of philanthropy and charity work , modeling , motivational speaking , television performances , and advertising . [ citation needed ]\n\nCheerleading carries the highest rate of catastrophic injuries to female athletes in high school and collegiate sports. Of the United States' 2.9 million female high school athletes, only 3% are cheerleaders, yet cheerleading accounts for nearly 65% of all catastrophic injuries in girls' high school athletics. In data covering the 1982–83 academic year through the 2018–19 academic year in the US, the rate of serious, direct traumatic injury per 100,000 participants was 1.68 for female cheerleaders at the high school level, the highest for all high school sports surveyed. : table 9a The college rate could not be determined, as the total number of collegiate cheerleaders was unknown, but the total number of traumatic, direct catastrophic injuries over this period was 33 (28 female, 5 male), higher than all sports at this level aside from football. : table 5a Another study found that between 1982 and 2007, there were 103 fatal, disabling, or serious injuries recorded among female high school athletes, with the vast majority (67) occurring in cheerleading. \n\nThe main source of injuries comes from stunting , also known as pyramids. These stunts are performed at games and pep rallies, as well as competitions. Sometimes competition routines are focused solely around the use of difficult and risky stunts. These stunts usually include a flyer (the person on top), along with one or two bases (the people on the bottom), and one or two spotters in the front and back on the bottom. The most common cheerleading related injury is a concussion. 96% of those concussions are stunt related. Other injuries include: sprained ankles, sprained wrists, back injuries, head injuries (sometimes concussions), broken arms, elbow injuries, knee injuries, broken noses, and broken collarbones. Sometimes, however, injuries can be as serious as whiplash, broken necks, broken vertebrae, and death. \n\nThe journal Pediatrics has reportedly said that the number of cheerleaders suffering from broken bones , concussions , and sprains has increased by over 100 percent between the years of 1990 and 2002, and that in 2001, there were 25,000 hospital visits reported for cheerleading injuries dealing with the shoulder, ankle, head, and neck. Meanwhile, in the US, cheerleading accounted for 65.1% of all major physical injuries to high school females, and to 66.7% of major injuries to college students due to physical activity from 1982 to 2007, with 22,900 minors being admitted to hospital with cheerleading-related injuries in 2002. \n\nThe risks of cheerleading were highlighted at the death of Lauren Chang. Chang died on April 14, 2008, after competing in a competition where her teammate had kicked her so hard in the chest that her lungs collapsed. \n\nCheerleading (for both girls and boys) was one of the sports studied in the Pediatric Injury Prevention, Education and Research Program of the Colorado School of Public Health in 2009/10–2012/13. Data on cheerleading injuries is included in the report for 2012–13. \n\nInternational Cheer Union (ICU) : Established on April 26, 2004, the ICU is recognized by the SportAccord as the world governing body of cheerleading and the authority on all matters with relation to it. Including participation from its 105-member national federations reaching 3.5 million athletes globally, the ICU continues to serve as the unified voice for those dedicated to cheerleading's positive development around the world.\n\nFollowing a positive vote by the SportAccord General Assembly on May 31, 2013, in Saint Petersburg, the International Cheer Union (ICU) became SportAccord's 109th member, and SportAccord's 93rd international sports federation to join the international sports family. In accordance with the SportAccord statutes, the ICU is recognized as the world governing body of cheerleading and the authority on all matters related to it.\n\nThe ICU has introduced a Junior aged team (12–16) to compete at the Cheerleading Worlds, because cheerleading is now in provisional status to become a sport in the Olympics. For cheerleading to one day be in the Olympics, there must be a junior and senior team that competes at the world championships. The first junior cheerleading team that was selected to become the junior national team was Eastside Middle School, located in Mount Washington Kentucky and will represent the United States in the inaugural junior division at the world championships. \n\nThe ICU holds training seminars for judges and coaches, global events and the World Cheerleading Championships. The ICU is also fully applied to the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and is compliant under the code set by the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA).\n\nInternational Federation of Cheerleading (IFC) : Established on July 5, 1998, the International Federation of Cheerleading (IFC) is a non-profit federation based in Tokyo, Japan, and is a world governing body of cheerleading, primarily in Asia. The IFC objectives are to promote cheerleading worldwide, to spread knowledge of cheerleading, and to develop friendly relations among the member associations and federations.\n\nUSA Cheer : The USA Federation for Sport Cheering (USA Cheer) was established in 2007 to serve as the national governing body for all types of cheerleading in the United States and is recognized by the ICU. \"The USA Federation for Sport Cheering is a not-for profit 501(c)(6) organization that was established in 2007 to serve as the National Governing Body for Sport Cheering in the United States. USA Cheer exists to serve the cheer community, including club cheering (all star) and traditional school based cheer programs, and the growing sport of STUNT. USA Cheer has three primary objectives: help grow and develop interest and participation in cheer throughout the United States; promote safety and safety education for cheer in the United States; and represent the United States of America in international cheer competitions.\" In March 2018, they absorbed the American Association of Cheerleading Coaches and Advisors (AACCA) and now provide safety guidelines and training for all levels of cheerleading. Additionally, they organize the USA National Team.\n\nUniversal Cheerleading Association : UCA is an association owned by the company brand Varsity. \"Universal Cheerleaders Association was founded in 1974 by Jeff Webb to provide the best educational training for cheerleaders with the goal of incorporating high-level skills with traditional crowd leading. It was Jeff's vision that would transform cheerleading into the dynamic, athletic combination of high energy entertainment and school leadership that is loved by so many.\" \"Today, UCA is the largest cheerleading camp company in the world, offering the widest array of dates and locations of any camp company. We also celebrate cheerleader's incredible hard work and athleticism through the glory of competition at over 50 regional events across the country and our Championships at the Walt Disney World Resort every year.\" \"UCA has instilled leadership skills and personal confidence in more than 4.5 million athletes on and off the field while continuing to be the industry's leader for more than forty-five years. UCA has helped many cheerleaders get the training they need to succeed.\n\nAsian Thailand Cheerleading Invitational (ATCI) : Organised by the Cheerleading Association of Thailand (CAT) in accordance with the rules and regulations of the International Federation of Cheerleading (IFC). The ATCI is held every year since 2009. At the ATCI, many teams from all over Thailand compete, joining them are many invited neighbouring nations who also send cheer squads.\n\nCheerleading Asia International Open Championships (CAIOC) : Hosted by the Foundation of Japan Cheerleading Association (FJCA) in accordance with the rules and regulations of the IFC. The CAIOC has been a yearly event since 2007. Every year, many teams from all over Asia converge in Tokyo to compete. \n\nCheerleading World Championships (CWC) : Organised by the IFC. The IFC is a non-profit organisation founded in 1998 and based in Tokyo, Japan. The CWC has been held every two years since 2001, and to date, the competition has been held in Japan, the United Kingdom, Finland, Germany, and Hong Kong . The 6th CWC was held at the Hong Kong Coliseum on November 26–27, 2011. \n\nICU World Championships : The International Cheer Union currently encompasses 105 National Federations from countries across the globe. Every year, the ICU host the World Cheerleading Championship. This competition uses a more collegiate style performance and rulebook. Countries assemble and send only one team to represent them.\n\nNational Cheerleading Championships (NCC) : The NCC is the annual IFC-sanctioned national cheerleading competition in Indonesia organised by the Indonesian Cheerleading Community (ICC). Since NCC 2010, the event is now open to international competition, representing a significant step forward for the ICC. Teams from many countries such as Japan, Thailand, the Philippines, and Singapore participated in the ground breaking event.\n\nPan-American Cheerleading Championships (PCC) : The PCC was held for the first time in 2009 in the city of Latacunga , Ecuador and is the continental championship organised by the Pan-American Federation of Cheerleading (PFC). The PFC, operating under the umbrella of the IFC, is the non-profit continental body of cheerleading whose aim it is to promote and develop cheerleading in the Americas. The PCC is a biennial event, and was held for the second time in Lima, Peru, in November 2010.\n\nUSASF/IASF Worlds : Many United States cheerleading organizations form and register the not-for-profit entity the United States All Star Federation (USASF) and also the International All Star Federation (IASF) to support international club cheerleading and the World Cheerleading Club Championships. The first World Cheerleading Championships, or Cheerleading Worlds, were hosted by the USASF/IASF at the Walt Disney World Resort and taped for an ESPN global broadcast in 2004. This competition is only for All-Star/Club cheer. Only level 6 and 7 teams may attend and must receive a bid from a partner company.\n\nVarsity : Varsity Spirit, a branch of Varsity Brands is a parent company which, over the past 10 years, has absorbed or bought most other cheerleading event production companies. The following is a list of subsidiary competition companies owned by Varsity Spirit: \n\nIn the United States, the designation of a \"sport\" is important because of Title IX . There is a large debate on whether or not cheerleading should be considered a sport for Title IX (a portion of the United States Education Amendments of 1972 forbidding discrimination under any education program on the basis of sex) purposes. These arguments have varied from institution to institution and are reflected in how they treat and organize cheerleading within their schools. Some institutions have been accused of not providing equal opportunities to their male students or for not treating cheerleading as a sport, which reflects on the opportunities they provide to their athletes.\n\nThe Office for Civil Rights (OCR) issued memos and letters to schools that cheerleading, both sideline and competitive, may not be considered \"athletic programs\" for the purposes of Title IX. Supporters consider cheerleading, as a whole, a sport, citing the heavy use of athletic talents while critics see it as a physical activity because a \"sport\" implies a competition among all squads and not all squads compete, along with subjectivity of competitions where—as with gymnastics , diving , and figure skating —scores are assessed based on human judgment and not an objective goal or measurement of time. \n\nThe Office for Civil Rights' primary concern was ensuring that institutions complied with Title IX, which means offering equal opportunities to all students despite their gender. In their memos, their main point against cheerleading being a sport was that the activity is underdeveloped and unorganized to have varsity-level athletic standing among students. This claim was not universal and the Office for Civil Rights would review cheerleading on a case-by-case basis. Due to this the status of cheerleading under Title IX has varied from region to region based on the institution and how they organize their teams. However, within their decisions, the Office for Civil Rights never clearly stated any guidelines on what was and was not considered a sport under Title IX.\n\nOn January 27, 2009, in a lawsuit involving an accidental injury sustained during a cheerleading practice, the Wisconsin Supreme Court ruled that cheerleading is a full-contact sport in that state, not allowing any participants to be sued for accidental injury. In contrast, on July 21, 2010, in a lawsuit involving whether college cheerleading qualified as a sport for purposes of Title IX , a federal court, citing a current lack of program development and organization, ruled that it is not a sport at all. \n\nThe National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) does not recognize cheerleading as a sport. In 2014, the American Medical Association adopted a policy that, as the leading cause of catastrophic injuries of female athletes both in high school and college, cheerleading should be considered a sport. While there are cheerleading teams at the majority of the NCAA's Division I schools, they are still not recognized as a sport. This results in many teams not being properly funded. Additionally, there are little to no college programs offering scholarships because their universities cannot offer athletic scholarships to \"spirit\" team members. \n\nIn 2010, Quinnipiac University was sued for not providing equal opportunities for female athletes as required by Title IX. The university disbanded its volleyball team and created a new competitive cheerleading sports team. The issue with Biediger v. Quinnipiac University is centered around whether competitive cheerleading could be considered a sport for Title IX. The university had not provided additional opportunities for their female athletes which led to the court ruling in favor that cheerleading could not count as a varsity sport. This case established clear guidelines on what qualifies as a sport under Title IX, these guidelines are known as the three-pronged approach. The three-pronged approach is as follows:\n\nThe three-pronged approach was the first official guideline that clearly stated what criteria were necessary when deciding what activity was considered a sport or not under Title IX. This approach was used and is still continued to be used by the Office for Civil Rights. Based on this approach the Office for Civil Rights still considers cheerleading, including both sideline and competitive, not a sport under Title IX.\n\nCheerleading in Canada is rising in popularity among the youth in co-curricular programs. Cheerleading has grown from the sidelines to a competitive activity throughout the world and in particular Canada. Cheerleading has a few streams in Canadian sports culture. It is available at the middle-school, high-school, collegiate, and best known for all-star. There are multiple regional, provincial, and national championship opportunities for all athletes participating in cheerleading. Canada does not have provincial teams, just a national program referred to as Team Canada, facilitated by Cheer Canada. Their first year as a national team was in 2009 when they represented Canada at the International Cheer Union World Cheerleading Championships International Cheer Union (ICU). \n\nCheer Canada acts as the Canadian national governing body for cheer, as recognised by the International Cheer Union. There are a number of provincial sports organizations that also exist in Canada under Cheer Canada, each governing cheer within their province which BC Sport Cheer, Alberta Cheerleading Association, Saskatchewan Cheerleading Association, Cheer Manitoba, Ontario Cheerleading Federation, Federation de Cheerleading du Quebec, Newfoundland and Labrador Cheerleading Athletics, Cheer New Brunswick and Cheer Nova Scotia. Cheer Canada and the provincial organizations utilise the IASF divisions and rules for all star cheer and performance cheer (all star dance) and the ICU divisions and rules for scholastic cheer. Canadian Cheer (previously known as Cheer Evolution) is the largest cheer and dance organization for Canada, and currently comply to Cheer Canada's rules and guidelines for their 15 events. Varsity Spirit also hosts events within Canada utilising the Cheer Canada/IASF rules. There are currently over 400 clubs and schools recognised by Cheer Canada, with over 25,000 participants in 2023. \n\nThere are two world championship competitions that Canada participates in. The first is the ICU World Championships where the Canadian National Teams compete against other countries. The second is The Cheerleading Worlds where Canadian club teams, referred to as \"all-star\" teams, compete within the IASF divisions. National team members who compete at the ICU Worlds can also compete with their \"all-star club\" teams at the IASF World Championships. Although athletes can compete in both International Cheer Union (ICU) and IASF championships, crossovers between teams at each individual competition are not permitted. Teams compete against the other teams from their countries on the first day of competition and the top three teams from each country in each division continue to finals. At the end of finals, the top team scoring the highest for their country earns the \"Nations Cup\". Canada has multiple teams across their country that compete in the IASF Cheerleading Worlds Championship. In total, Canada has had 98 International podium finishes at cheer events. \n\nThe International Cheer Union (ICU) is built of 119 member nations, who are eligible to field teams to compete against one another at the ICU World Championships in a number of divisions in both cheerleading and performance cheer, with special divisions for youth, junior and adaptive abilities athletes. Cheer Canada fields a national team, with up to 40 athletes from around the country for both a senior national all girl and senior national coed team training at three training camps across the season in Canada before 28 athletes per team are selected to train in Florida, with 24 athletes going on to compete on the competition floor at ICU Worlds. In the 2023 ICU World Championships, Canada won a total of 4 medals (1 gold and 3 silver) with teams entered in the Youth All Girl, Youth Coed, Unified Median, Unified Advanced, Premier All Girl, Premier Coed, Performance Cheer Hip Hop doubles, Performance Cheer Pom Doubles and Performance Cheer Pom divisions. \n\nIn total, Team Canada holds podium placements at the ICU World Championships from the following years/divisions:\n\nCheerleading in Mexico is a popular sport commonly seen in Mexican College Football and Professional Mexican Soccer sporting events. Cheerleading emerged within the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), the highest House of Studies in the country, during the 1930s, almost immediately after it was granted its autonomy. Since then, this phenomenon has been evolving to become what it is now. Firstly, it was developed only in the UNAM, later in other secondary and higher education institutions in Mexico City , and currently in practically the entire country. \n\nIn Mexico, this sport is endorsed by the Mexican Federation of Cheerleaders and Cheerleading Groups (Federación Mexicana de Porristas y Grupos de Animación) (FMPGA), a body that regulates competitions in Mexico and subdivisions such as the Olympic Confederation of Cheerleaders (COP Brands), National Organization of Cheerleaders (Organización Nacional de Porristas) (ONP) and the Mexican Organization of Trainers and Animation Groups (Organización Mexicana de Entrenadores y Grupos de Animación) (OMEGA Mexico), these being the largest in the country. \n\nIn 2021, the third edition of the National Championship of State Teams was held and organized by The Mexican Federation of Cheerleaders and Cheerleading Groups, on this occasion, the event was held virtually, broadcasting live, through the Vimeo platform.\n\nIn Mexico there are more than 500 teams and almost 10,000 athletes who practice this sport, in addition to a representative national team of Mexico, which won first place in the cheerleading world championship organized by the ICU ( International Cheer Union ) on April 24, 2015, receiving a gold medal; In 2016, Mexico became the second country with the most medals in the world in this sport. With 27 medals, it is considered the second world power in this sport, only behind the United States. In the 2019 Coed Premier World Cheerleading Championship Mexico ranked 4th just behind the United States, Canada and Taiwan. In 2021, the Mexican team won 3rd place at the Junior Boom category in World Cheerleading Championship 2021 hosted by international cheerleading federation. \n\nThis section has a link to a separate Wikipedia page that talks about the history and growth of cheerleading in the United Kingdom. This can be used to compare and contrast the activity in the U.S. and in Australia.\n\nThis section has a link to a separate Wikipedia page that talks about the history and growth of cheerleading in Australia. This can be used to compare and contrast the activity in the U.S. and in Australia.\n\nThis section has a link to a separate Wikipedia page that lists former cheerleaders and well-known cheerleading squads.",
  "Majority Australian-owned under Australian Government legislation [ a ]\n\nQantas ( / ˈ k w ɒ n t ə s / KWON -təs ), formally Qantas Airways Limited , is the flag carrier of Australia , and the largest airline by fleet size, international flights, and international destinations in Australia and Oceania . A founding member of the Oneworld airline alliance, it is the only airline in the world that flies to all seven continents , with it operating flights to Africa , Antarctica , [ b ] Asia , Europe , North America and South America from its hubs in Sydney , Perth , Melbourne , and Brisbane . It also flies to over 60 domestic destinations across Australia. \n\nQantas is the world's third-oldest airline by foundation date and the oldest airline in the English-speaking world — being founded in November 1920. Qantas is an acronym of the airline's original name, Queensland and Northern Territory Aerial Services , as it originally served Queensland and the Northern Territory . It is popularly nicknamed \"The Flying Kangaroo\" and has the official slogan \"Spirit of Australia\".\n\nQantas is based in the Sydney suburb of Mascot , adjacent to its main hub at Sydney Airport . As of March 2023 [update] , Qantas Group had a 60.8% share of the Australian domestic market. Various subsidiary airlines operate to regional centres and on some trunk routes within Australia, as well as some short haul international flights under the QantasLink banner. Qantas owns Jetstar , a low-cost airline that operates both international services from Australia and domestic services within Australia and New Zealand. It holds stakes in a number of other Jetstar-branded airlines in Asia, as well as Alliance Airlines and Fiji Airways .\n\nQantas was founded in Winton, Queensland on 16 November 1920 by Hudson Fysh , Paul McGinness and Fergus McMaster as Queensland and Northern Territory Aerial Services Limited. The airline's first aircraft was an Avro 504K . It moved its headquarters to Longreach, Queensland in 1921 and Brisbane , Queensland in 1930. \n\nIn 1934, QANTAS and Britain's Imperial Airways , a forerunner of British Airways , formed a new company, Qantas Empire Airways Limited (QEA). In December 1934, the new airline began operations, flying between Brisbane and Darwin . QEA flew internationally from May 1935, when the service from Darwin was extended to Singapore . Imperial Airways operated the rest of the service through to London. When World War II began, enemy action and accidents destroyed half of the fleet of ten. Most of the fleet was taken over by the Australian government for war service. \n\nIn 1943, flying boat services resumed, with flights between the Swan River at Crawley in Perth , Western Australia and Koggala Lake in Ceylon, now Sri Lanka . This linked up with the British Overseas Airways Corporation , BOAC, the successor airline to Imperial Airways, service to London. Qantas' kangaroo logo was first used on the \" Kangaroo Route \", begun in 1944, from Sydney to Karachi, where BOAC crews took over for the rest of the journey to the UK. \n\nIn 1947, QEA was nationalised by the Australian government led by Labor Prime Minister Ben Chifley . QANTAS Limited was then wound up. After nationalisation , Qantas' remaining domestic network, in Queensland, was transferred to the nationally owned Trans-Australia Airlines , leaving Qantas with a purely international network. Shortly after nationalisation, QEA began its first services outside the British Empire , to Tokyo. Services to Hong Kong began around the same time. In 1957, a head office, Qantas House, opened in Sydney. \n\nIn June 1959, Qantas entered the jet age when the first Boeing 707–138 was delivered. On 14 September 1992, Qantas merged with nationally owned domestic airline, Australian Airlines , renamed from Trans-Australia Airlines in 1986. Australian Airlines's aircraft started to be rebranded as Qantas aircraft in 1993. Qantas was gradually privatised between 1993 and 1997. \n\nIn 1998, Qantas co-founded the Oneworld alliance with American Airlines , British Airways , Canadian Airlines , and Cathay Pacific , with other airlines joining subsequently.\n\nWith the entry of new discount airline Virgin Blue, now Virgin Australia , into the domestic market in 2000, Qantas' market share fell. Qantas created the budget Jetstar in 2001 to compete. The main domestic competitor to Qantas, Ansett Australia , collapsed in September 2001. \n\nQantas briefly revived the Australian Airlines name as a short-lived international budget airline between 2002 and 2006. This subsidiary was shut down in favour of expanding Jetstar internationally, including to New Zealand. In 2004, the Qantas group expanded into the Asian budget airline market with Jetstar Asia , in which Qantas owns a minority stake. In 2007, a similar model was used for an investment into Jetstar Pacific , headquartered in Vietnam, and Jetstar Japan , launched in 2012.\n\nIn December 2006, Qantas was the subject of a failed bid from a consortium calling itself Airline Partners Australia . In 2008, merger talks with British Airways did not proceed to an agreement. In 2011, industrial relations dispute between Qantas and the Transport Workers Union of Australia resulted in the grounding of all Qantas aircraft and a lock-out of the airline's staff for two days. \n\nOn 25 March 2018, a Qantas Boeing 787 flew non-stop between Australia and Europe, connecting the two continents by air for the first time, with the arrival in London of Flight 9 (QF9). QF9 was a 17-hour, 14,498 km (9,009-mile) journey from Perth Airport in Western Australia to London Heathrow . \n\nOn 20 October 2019, Qantas Airways completed the longest commercial flight to date, between New York City and Sydney using a Boeing 787–9 Dreamliner in 19 hours and 20 minutes. \n\nOn 19 March 2020, Qantas suspended about 60% of domestic flights, put two thirds of its employees on leave, suspended all international flights and grounded more than 150 of its aircraft from the end of March until at least 31 May 2020, following expanded COVID-19 pandemic government travel restrictions. To survive the pandemic, Qantas axed 6,000 jobs and announced a plan to raise A$1.9 billion in new capital. Qantas offloaded its 30% stake in Jetstar Pacific to Vietnam Airlines , retiring the Jetstar brand in Vietnam. \n\nIn July 2020, Qantas retired its last Boeing 747-438ER, after almost 49 years of continuous operation of the type—the first 747-238B was introduced in August 1971. All twelve Airbus A380s were placed in storage, ten at Mojave Air & Space Port and two at Los Angeles International Airport, for a minimum of three years. The pilots of the last Boeing 747 flight to Mojave Desert via Los Angeles traced the shape of the iconic Qantas logo in the flight path before the jet continued on its journey. \n\nIn November 2020, Qantas issued a public statement expressing their intention to require passengers traveling overseas to provide proof of COVID-19 inoculation. As per the statement made by Alan Joyce, the airline's CEO, the presence of a COVID-19 vaccine would be considered indispensable for the purpose of travel. Joyce expressed their intention to potentially modify the terms and conditions, to specify that anyone traveling internationally must have a vaccination before embarking. Qantas also announced a cut of 2,000 jobs to limit its financial losses. \n\nIn August 2021, Qantas required all of its 22,000 employees to be fully vaccinated against the virus. \n\nIn May 2022, Qantas ordered twelve A350-1000 aircraft from Airbus , to be used in non-stop flights from Sydney to London in late 2025. In the same month, Qantas agreed terms to purchase Alliance Airlines . In April 2023, the Australian Competition & Consumer Commission (ACCC) opposed the takeover. \n\nBy April 2024 Qantas had returned ten of its original twelve A380s to service, with all serviceable aircraft having undergone major refurbishment work to enhance the onboard soft furnishings. \n\nIn August 2022, Qantas Airways announced plans to compete in June 2023 with Air New Zealand on the non-stop Auckland –New York route. Qantas flights would originate in Sydney, before flying in 2025 on a non-stop Sydney–New York route, as part of Project Sunrise. Qantas aims to eliminate the \" tyranny of distance \" by developing non-stop flight routes connecting Australian cities to New York City, and to London. In February 2023, Qantas announced soaring profits of A$1.7bn for the second half of 2022, after experiencing losses due to COVID. In a development described by ABC News as a \"mammoth protest vote\", on 3 November 2023 nearly 83% of Qantas shareholders voted against the airline's remuneration report. \n\nQantas operates regular services from Australia to destinations in Africa, Asia, Europe, North America and South America. Its domestic network serves all Australian states , along with the Australian Capital Territory , Northern Territory and the external territory of Norfolk Island . In addition, Qantas also operates 'flightseeing' charters to Antarctica from Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth, and formerly from Adelaide, Canberra, and Hobart, in partnership with Melbourne-based company Antarctica Flights. It first flew these Antarctic flightseeing trips in 1977. They were suspended for a number of years due to the crash of Air New Zealand Flight 901 on Mount Erebus in 1979. Qantas restarted the flights in 1994. Although these flights do not touch down, they require specific polar operations and crew training due to factors like sector whiteout , which contributed to the 1979 Air New Zealand disaster .\n\nAs of 2024, Qantas operates the following fifth-freedom services between the following cities:\n\nQantas uses Perth as a transit point for its European services between Sydney and Paris (QF33 and QF34), as well as for a seasonal service between Sydney and Rome (QF5 and QF6). These flights depart and arrive at the international terminal at Sydney Airport despite the Sydney-Perth segment of these flights being domestic. As Qantas is an Australian airline, it is permitted to carry, and sells tickets for domestic passengers intending to fly solely between Sydney and Perth. Qantas issues domestic passengers on these flights with an orange 'D' sticker that allows them to bypass customs and immigration, and passports are not necessary for these passengers. \n\nAs of October 2024 [update] , Qantas had codeshare agreements with the following airlines: \n\nAs of November 2024 [update] , the Qantas Group and its subsidiaries operate 308 aircraft, including 85 aircraft by Jetstar Airways; 90 by the various QantasLink-branded airlines and eight by Express Freighters Australia (on behalf of Qantas Freight). \n\nThe group also has over 150 narrow-body and 36 wide-body aircraft firm orders as of August 2024 [update] , across the Airbus A220 , Airbus A320neo , Airbus A321neo , Airbus A350 and Boeing 787 families to replace the existing fleet over the following decade, with these aircraft being distributed amongst Qantas, QantasLink and Jetstar. \n\nFirst class is available exclusively on the Airbus A380. \n\nIt offers 14 individual suites in a 1-1-1 layout. The seats face forward for takeoff, but can rotate to the side for sleeping and dining with 83.5in seat pitch (extending to a 212 cm fully flat bed) and a width of 74 cm (29 in). Each suite contains a 43 cm (17 in) widescreen monitor. In addition to AC power outlets, USB ports are also offered. Passengers are also able to utilise the lounge on the upper deck. Complimentary access to both the first class and business class lounges (or affiliated lounges) is offered as well.\n\nUpdated versions of this seat were fitted to the airline's refurbished Airbus A380 aircraft from late 2019. The seat features refreshed cushioning and larger entertainment screens compared to the older version. \n\nBusiness Suites are available on all Boeing 787, Airbus A330, and selected Airbus A380 aircraft.\n\nThese seats are lie-flat and are in a 1-2-1 configuration. The Business Suite was introduced on the A330 in October 2014, and includes a Panasonic touchscreen eX3 system. By the end of 2016, the business class seats of Qantas' entire Airbus A330 fleet were refitted. Airbus A330 Business Suites are available on Asian routes, transcontinental routes across Australia and selected routes to New Zealand. \n\nUpdated versions of this seat were fitted to the airline's new Boeing 787 fleet from late 2017. \n\nPremium economy class is offered on all Airbus A380 and Boeing 787–9 aircraft.\n\nOn the Airbus A380, the seat pitch ranges from 97 to 107 cm (38 to 42 in), with a width of 50 cm ( 19 + 1 ⁄ 2 in). On the Boeing 787, it is configured in a 2-3-2 seating arrangement, whereas it is in a 2-3-2 seating arrangement at the rear of the upper deck on the A380. The total number of seats depends on the aircraft type, as A380s have 35–60 seats, (depending on the configuration) and 787s have 28 seats.\n\nIn 2019, Qantas began retrofitting its Airbus A380 aircraft with new Premium Economy seats, as offered on Boeing 787 aircraft. The new cabin will gain 25 premium economy seats compared to the previous configuration. \n\nInternational Economy class is available on all Qantas mainline passenger aircraft.\n\nSeat pitch is usually 79 cm (31 in) and seat width ranges from 43 to 44 cm (17 to 17 + 1 ⁄ 2 in). Layouts are 3–3 on the 737, 2-4-2 on the A330, and 3-3-3 on the B787-9. On the A380, the layout is 3-4-3 and there are four self-service snack bars located in between cabins. \n\nIn 2019, Qantas began retrofitting its Airbus A380 aircraft with new Economy seats containing new seat cushions and improved inflight entertainment, as offered on Airbus A330 and Boeing 787 aircraft. The new aircraft will have fewer economy seats compared to the previous configuration due to an increase in the number of premium seats. \n\nAll Qantas mainline aircraft contain some form of video and audio entertainment. Qantas has several types of in-flight entertainment (IFE) systems installed on its aircraft.\n\nThe \"Total Entertainment System\" by Rockwell Collins was available on selected domestic and international aircraft between 2000 and 2019. This AVOD system included personal LCD screens in all classes, located in the seat back for economy and business class, and in the armrest for premium economy and first class.\n\nThe Mainscreen System is available on selected Boeing 737–800 aircraft. This entertainment system, introduced gradually between 2002 and 2011, has overhead video screens as the main form of entertainment. Movies are shown on the screens on longer flights and TV programmes on shorter flights. A news telecast will usually be shown at the start of each flight. Audio options are less varied than on Q, iQ or the Total Entertainment System.\n\nThe \"iQ\" inflight entertainment system by Panasonic Avionics Corporation is available on selected Airbus A380 and Boeing 737–800 aircraft. This AVOD experience, introduced in 2008, is based on the Panasonic Avionics system and features expanded entertainment options, touch screens and new communications-related features such as Wi-Fi and mobile phone functionality, as well as increased support for electronics (such as USB and iPod connectivity). \n\nThe \"Q\" inflight entertainment system by Panasonic Avionics Corporation is available on all Airbus A330-300, A330-200, Boeing 787 and selected Airbus A380 aircraft. This audio video on demand (AVOD) experience, introduced in 2014 and updated in 2018 on selected aircraft, is based on the Panasonic eX3 system and features extensive entertainment options; enhanced touch screens; and communications-related features such as Wi-Fi and mobile phone functionality; as well as increased support for electronics (such as USB and iPod connectivity). The \"my flight\" feature offers access to maps, playlists, and a service timeline showing when drinks and meals will be served and the best time for resting on long-haul flights. \n\nIn 2024, Qantas selected Panasonic's OLED 4K 'Astrova' seatback screen to be equipped on its Airbus A350 fleet to be delivered from 2026. The entertainment system will feature \"high-fidelity multi-channel spatial audio technology\" and Bluetooth connectivity allowing for passengers to connect their personal wireless earbuds or headphones. The Astrova IFE system will also deliver 100 W of mobile device and laptop fast-charging via USB-C , available through all phases of flight. \n\nQ Streaming is an in-flight entertainment system in which entertainment is streamed to iPads or personal devices available in all classes on selected aircraft. A selection of movies, TV, music, and a kids' choice are available.\n\nIn 2007, Qantas conducted a trial for use of mobile telephones with AeroMobile , during domestic services for three months on a Boeing 767. During the trial, passengers were allowed to send and receive text messages and emails but were not able to make or receive calls. \n\nIn July 2015, Qantas signed a deal with American cable network HBO to provide over 120 hours of television programming in-flight from the network on its aircraft, as well as original lifestyle and entertainment programming from both Foxtel and the National Geographic Channel . In August 2022, it was announced that the airline had partnered with Network 10 owner Paramount to launch the Paramount+ service on its in-flight entertainment systems. \n\nIn 2017, Qantas began offering complimentary Wi-Fi on its domestic aircraft. The services utilises NBN Co Sky Muster satellites to deliver higher speeds than generally offered by onboard Wi-Fi. Previously, in July 2007, Qantas announced that Wi-Fi would be available on its long haul A380s and 747-400s although that system ultimately did not proceed following trials. \n\nIn 2023, Qantas began offering complimentary Wi-Fi on select international flights. Qantas aims to have complimentary Wi-Fi on all of its international aircraft by 2026. The Wi-Fi will be available to all customers free of charge, regardless of class, ticket or frequent flyer tier, as is the case with the airline's domestic Wi-Fi. \n\nUntil 2014, the Australian Nine Network provided a news bulletin for Qantas entitled Nine's Qantas Inflight News , which was the same broadcast as Nine's Early Morning News , however Nine lost the contract to Sky News Australia in 2014. In 2022, Qantas ended its contract with Sky News and signed an agreement with the Australian Broadcasting Corporation 's ABC News to provide inflight digital news services for Qantas passengers. \n\nQantas: The Australian Way is the airline's in-flight magazine. In mid-2015, the magazine ended a 14-year publishing deal with Bauer Media , switching its publisher to Medium Rare. \n\nThe Qantas frequent-flyer program is aimed at rewarding customer loyalty. It is Australia's largest loyalty program, with 16.4 million members as of June 2024. The program is long-standing, although the date of the actual inception has been a matter that has generated some commentary. Qantas state the program launched in 1987 although other sources claim what is the current program was launched in the early 1990s, with a Captain's Club program existing before that. \n\nQantas operates international First Lounges in Auckland, Melbourne, Singapore, Sydney and Los Angeles. A London First Lounge is currently under construction and will open in 2025. Compared to international Business lounges the First Lounges generally offer superior food and beverage. Access is available to First Class, Qantas Platinum, Platinum One, and Oneworld Emerald frequent flyers travelling on a Qantas, Jetstar or Oneworld flight. Qantas Chairmans Lounge Members are permitted access when travelling on any airline. \n\nQantas operates international Business Lounges in Auckland, Brisbane, Hong Kong, Honolulu, London, Los Angeles, Melbourne, Perth, Singapore, Sydney and Wellington. Access is available to international Business Class, First Class, Qantas Club Members, Qantas Gold, Platinum, Platinum One, OneWorld Sapphire and Emerald frequent flyers when travelling on a Qantas, Jetstar or Oneworld flight. These International lounges replaced the formerly separate first and business class lounges in these locations. These new lounges provide similar service to what is currently offered by Sofitel in the flagship First lounges in Sydney and Melbourne and a dining experience featuring Neil Perry's Spice Temple inspired dishes and signature cocktails. \n\nQantas operates domestic Chairman's Lounges in Adelaide, Brisbane, Canberra, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney. Compared to domestic Qantas club and Business lounges the Chairman's Lounge offers superior food and beverage. Access is only available to Qantas Chairman's Lounge Members which is via invitation-only. Chairman's Lounge Memberships are often given to Australian politicians, celebrities, high-profile members of the media and company executives that hold major corporate travel accounts with Qantas. \n\nQantas operates domestic Business Lounges in Brisbane, Canberra, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney. A new Adelaide business lounge is currently under construction and will open in mid-2025. Access is available to domestic Business Class, Qantas Platinum, Platinum One, and Oneworld Emerald frequent flyers travelling on a Qantas, Jetstar or Oneworld flight. Compared to Qantas Club lounges the Business Lounges generally offer superior food and beverage. \n\nQantas operates 12 domestic Qantas Club lounges across Australia. Access is available to Qantas domestic Business Class travellers, Qantas Club Members, Qantas Gold, Platinum and Platinum One, Oneworld Sapphire and Emerald frequent flyers when travelling on a Qantas, Jetstar or Oneworld flight.\n\nQantas operates 'regional' lounges in Broome, Coffs Harbour, Devonport, Emerald, Gladstone, Kalgoorlie, Karratha, Launceston, Mackay, Port Hedland, Rockhampton, Tamworth and Townsville. Access requirements are identical to those of the Qantas Club. \n\nQantas Club Members, Gold Frequent Flyers, and Oneworld Sapphire holders are permitted to enter domestic Qantas Clubs when flying on Qantas or Jetstar flights along with one guest who must be travelling. Platinum and Oneworld Emerald Members are permitted to bring in two guests who must be travelling. Internationally, members using Qantas International Business Class lounges (or the Oneworld equivalent). Guests of the member must be travelling to gain access to international lounges. When flying with American Airlines , members have access to Admirals Club lounges and when flying on British Airways, members have access to British Airways' Terraces and Galleries Lounges. Travellers holding Oneworld Sapphire or Emerald status are also allowed in Qantas Club lounges worldwide.\n\nAccess to Qantas First lounges is open to passengers travelling on internationally operated Qantas or Oneworld first-class flights, as well as Qantas platinum and Oneworld emerald frequent flyers. Emirates first-class passengers are also eligible for access to the Qantas first lounges in Sydney and Melbourne. \n\nThe Qantas Club also offers membership by paid subscription (one, two, or four years) or by achievement of Gold or Platinum frequent flyer status. Benefits of membership include lounge access, priority check-in, priority luggage handling and increased luggage allowances.\n\nBeginning in the early 2000s, Qantas began working with industrial designer Marc Newson on cabin interiors, product design and first-class lounges. This collaboration resulted in the introduction of the Skybed business class seat in 2003 and led to Newson being named as the first Creative Director of Qantas in 2006. Newson was responsible for the design of the Qantas A380 fleet which first entered service in 2008, as well as the Sydney first class lounge. \n\nNewson protégé David Caon , since 2016, has been enlisted by Qantas for product design. Caon has designed the cabins of current Qantas Boeing 787, A380 and A220 aircraft, as well as upcoming Airbus A350 and Airbus A321neo aircraft. Caon has also designed new international first and business lounges, domestic business and club lounges, regional lounges, furniture, and accessories. Furniture featured in Qantas first-class lounges and onboard has been manufactured by companies such as Poltrona Frau , Cappellini , Alessi , Tai Ping and Noritake . Qantas has also worked with Sydney's Charles Perkins Centre to conduct research to determine optimal lighting conditions to reduce jetlag on long-haul flights and improve comfort and health \"before, during and after long-haul flights\". \n\nQantas has received various awards for design. \n\nAustralian chef and entrepreneur Neil Perry has been responsible for the onboard and ground based culinary offerings of the airline since becoming the director of food, beverage, and service in 1997, and currently Qantas' catering operations are supplied by dnata . In 2022, to celebrate the 25-year collaboration with Perry, Qantas reintroduced a selection of his most popular inflight and lounge dishes. Qantas is currently the only airline in Australia to offer complimentary meals, snacks and beverages on all domestic flights, including regional QantasLink services. \n\nParis-based Australian designer Martin Grant [ fr ] is responsible for the current Qantas uniforms that were unveiled on 16 April 2013. These were to replace the previous uniforms, dubbed colloquially as \"Morrissey\" by staff after the designer, Peter Morrissey . The new outfits feature a colour palette of black, red and fuchsia pink. Qantas chief executive Alan Joyce stated that the new design \"speaks of Australian style on the global stage\" at the launch event that involved employees modelling the uniforms. Grant consulted with Qantas staff members over the course of one year to finalise the 35 styles that were eventually created. Not all employees were happy with the new uniform, however, with one flight attendant saying \"The uniforms are really tight and they are simply not practical for the very physical job we have to do.\" In 2020 Grant also designed a Qantas branded athleisure-wear collection. \n\nQantas declared in 2023 that it had ended uniform rules based on gender. Female flight attendants are no longer required to wear high heels, male flight attendants can wear makeup, and flight attendants of any gender can wear the same type of jewelry and have long hair in a ponytail or bun. At the end of January 2025, Qantas announced plans to refresh the uniforms for its onboard crews. The airline says that they will now engage with several Australian designers to review the requirements and undertake a selection process for what will become the eleventh uniform in its history. The next uniform designer will be announced in the coming months with Qantas planning to debut the new design in 2027 alongside with Qantas’ huge fleet renewal program. Additionally, Qantas will start surveying its uniformed workforce to assist in developing the new outfits. \n\nTwo Qantas aircraft are currently painted in an Indigenous Australian art scheme. One aircraft, a Boeing 737-800 registered as VH-XZJ, wears a livery called Mendoowoorrji , which was revealed in November 2013. The design was drawn from the late West Australian Aboriginal artist Paddy Bedford . The second, a Boeing 787 registered VH-ZND, is adorned in a paint scheme inspired by the late Emily Kame Kngwarreye 's 1991 painting Yam Dreaming . The adaptation of Yam Dreaming to the aircraft, led by Balarinji , a Sydney-based and Aboriginal-owned design firm, incorporates the red Qantas tailfin into the design, which includes white dots with red and orange tones. The design depicts the yam plant, an important and culturally significant symbol in Kngwarreye's Dreaming stories, and a staple food source in her home region of Utopia . The design was applied to the aircraft during manufacture, prior to its delivery in March 2018 to Alice Springs Airport , situated 230 kilometres southeast of Utopia, where the aircraft was met by Kngwarreye's descendants, the local community, and Qantas executives. The aircraft would later operate Qantas' inaugural nonstop services between Perth and London Heathrow , and between Melbourne and San Francisco , scheduled with Boeing 787 aircraft. \n\nAustralian Aboriginal art designs have previously adorned some Qantas aircraft; the first design was called Wunala Dreaming , which was unveiled in 1994 and had been painted on now-retired Boeing 747–400 and 747-400ER aircraft between 1994 and 2012. The motif was an overall-red design depicting ancestral spirits in the form of kangaroos travelling in the outback . \n\nThe second design was called Nalanji Dreaming and was depicted on a Boeing 747–300 from 1995 until its retirement in 2005. Nalanji Dreaming was a bright blue design inspired by rainforest landscape and tropical seas. \n\nThe third design was titled Yananyi Dreaming, and featured a depiction of Uluru . The scheme was designed by Uluru-based artist Rene Kulitja, in collaboration with Balarinji. It was painted on the 737 at the Boeing factory prior to its delivery in 2002. It was repainted into the standard livery in 2014.\n\nIn November 2014 the airline revealed that the 75th Boeing 737–800 jet to be delivered would carry a 'retro-livery' based on the airline's 1971 'ochre' colour scheme design featuring the iconic 'Flying Kangaroo' on its tail and other aspects drawn from its 1970s fleet. The aircraft was delivered on 17 November. \n\nQantas announced a second 737–800 would receive a 'retro roo' livery in October 2015. On 16 November 2015 the airline unveiled the second 'retro roo' 737, bearing a replica livery from 1959 to celebrate the airline's 95th birthday. \n\nSeveral Qantas aircraft have been decorated with promotional liveries, promoting telecommunications company Optus ; the Disney motion picture Planes ; the Australian national association football team, the Socceroos ; and the Australian national rugby union team, the Wallabies. Two aircraft – an Airbus A330-200 and a Boeing 747-400ER – were decorated with special liveries promoting the Oneworld airline alliance (of which Qantas is a member) in 2009. On 29 September 2014, nonstop Airbus A380 service to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport was inaugurated using an A380 decorated with a commemorative cowboy hat and bandana on the kangaroo tail logo. Prior to the 2017 Sydney Mardi Gras , Qantas decorated one of its Airbus A330-300 aircraft with rainbow lettering and depicted a rainbow flag on the tail of the aircraft. \n\nIn addition to the above awards, Qantas has consistently ranked in either first or second place in the annual AirlineRatings.com 'World's Safest Airline' awards since their inception in 2014. The 'Operational Safety Audit' from the International Air Transport Association , along with the International Civil Aviation Organisation 'country audit' are used as benchmarks by AirlineRatings.com when determining annual rankings. Qantas was named the world's safest airline from 2014 to 2017, from 2019 to 2021, and again in 2023, second to Air New Zealand in 2018, 2022 and 2024. \n\nThe company heads of Qantas Airways Limited are only listed from 1993, when Qantas' shares once again traded on the stock exchange as a publicly listed company, following the Australian Government 's move to privatise the remaining 75% of the airline. Throughout Qantas' history, since 1920, there have been many structures, branding and variations including the name 'Qantas'. Its current company structure was established in 1993, going from an unlisted public company in which the Commonwealth owned all of the shares, to a listed public company. A full list of Qantas chairpersons and managing directors can be found on the History of Qantas page.\n\nThe key trends for the Qantas Group (Qantas Airways Ltd and Controlled Entities, which includes Jetstar and Qantas Cargo), are shown below, as at year ending 30 June: \n\nQantas' headquarters are located at the Qantas Centre in the suburb of Mascot , Sydney, New South Wales. In December 2013, a redevelopment of the headquarters was completed. \n\nThe Australian Government has an ownership stake in Qantas through Australia’s sovereign wealth fund , the Future Fund , and the airline is listed on the Australian Securities Exchange . Under Commonwealth legislation, Qantas must be at least 51% owned by Australian shareholders. \n\nQantas has operated a number of passenger airline subsidiaries since inception, including: [ citation needed ]\n\nQantas operates a freight service under the name Qantas Freight , which uses aircraft operated by Qantas subsidiary Express Freighters Australia and leases aircraft from Atlas Air . Qantas wholly owns the logistics-and-air-freight company Australian airExpress .\n\nIn addition to its wholly owned subsidiaries, Qantas also owns minority equity stakes in a number of other Australian and foreign airlines:\n\nQantas, through its Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Programme, has some links with the Aboriginal Australian community. In the Qantas Reconciliation Action Plan 2015 – 2018, Qantas revealed that 1 percent of all their staff are Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. Qantas employs a full-time Diversity Coordinator, who is responsible for the programme. [ better source needed ]\n\nQantas has also bought and donated Aboriginal art. An art installation at its passenger lounge in Brisbane features a painting by Jenna Lee. Qantas has had a number of its aircraft painted with the art of Aboriginal artist Emily Kame Kngwarreye and others with art inspired by Rene Kulitja and Paddy Bedford . \n\nAn early television campaign, starting in 1969 and running for several decades, was aimed at American audiences. It featured a live koala , voiced by Howard Morris , who complained that too many tourists were coming to Australia and concluded \"I hate Qantas.\" The koala ads have been ranked among the greatest commercials of all time. A long-running advertising campaign features renditions by children's choirs of Peter Allen 's \" I Still Call Australia Home \", at various famous landmarks in Australia and foreign locations such as Venice . The song has been used in Qantas's safety videos since 2018. \n\nQantas is the main sponsor of the Australia national rugby union team . Qantas sponsors the Socceroos , Australia's national association football team. Qantas was the naming rights sponsor for the Formula One Australian Grand Prix from 2010 until 2012 . In December 2011, Qantas signed a four-year deal with Australian cricket's governing body Cricket Australia , to be the official carrier of the Australia national cricket team . \n\nQantas management has expressed strong support for Marriage Equality and LGBTIQ issues, with CEO Alan Joyce said to be, \"arguably the most prominent corporate voice in the marriage equality campaign\". As official airline partner for the Sydney Mardi Gras , Qantas decorated one of its aircraft with rainbow wording and positioned a rainbow flag next to the tail's flying kangaroo. Qantas also served pride cookies to its passengers. It had a rainbow roo float in the Mardi Gras parade. \n\nThere has been criticism of Qantas using its corporate power to prosecute the private interests on their staff and the community. Peter Dutton has said that chief executives such as Alan Joyce at Qantas should \"stick to their knitting\" rather than using the company's brand to advocate for political causes. A senior church leader has made similar comments. Despite the criticism, Qantas will continue to advocate for marriage equality which will include offering customers specially commissioned rings with the phrase, \"until we all belong\". This phrase will appear on Qantas boarding passes and other paraphernalia. The cost of the campaign by Qantas and other participating companies is expected to be more than $5 million. \n\nJoyce has pledged Qantas will, \"continue social-justice campaigning\", in relation to Israel Folau , sacked by Rugby Australia , which is financially supported by Qantas, following his social media postings on homosexuality .\n\nIn August 2011, the company announced that following financial losses of A$200 million ($209 million) for the year ending June 2011 and a decline in market share, major structural changes would be made. One planned change that did not come to fruition was the plan to create a new Asia-based premium airline that would operate under a different name. In addition to this plan, Qantas announced it planned to cut 1,000 jobs. The reforms included route changes, in particular the cessation of services to London via Hong Kong and Bangkok. While Qantas still operated in these cities, onward flights to London would be via its Oneworld partner British Airways under a code-share service. \n\nIn 2012, Qantas reported an A$245 million full-year loss to the end of June 2012, citing high fuel prices, intense competition and industrial disputes. This was the first full year loss since Qantas was fully privatised 17 years previously, in 1995, and led to the airline cancelling its order of 35 new Boeing 787 aircraft, to reduce its spending. Qantas subsequently divested itself of its 50% holding of StarTrack , Australia's largest road freight company, in part for acquiring full interest in Australian airExpress . In March 2012, Qantas set up Jetstar Hong Kong with China Eastern Airlines Corporation, which was intended to begin flights in 2013, but became embroiled in a protracted approval process. \n\nQantas and Emirates began an alliance on 31 March 2013, in which their combined carriers offered 98 flights per week to Dubai. In September 2013, the carrier predicted another A$ 250 million ( US$ 220 million) net loss for the half-year period that ended on 31 December and the implementation of further cost-cutting measures that would see the cut of 1,000 jobs within a year. S&P downgraded Qantas credit from BBB− (the lowest investment grade) to BB+. Moody's applied a similar downgrading a month later. \n\nLosses continued into the 2014 reporting year, with the Qantas Group reporting a half year loss of A$235 million ( US$208 million) and an eventual full year loss of A$2.84 billion. In February 2014, additional cost-cutting measures to save A$2 billion, including the loss of 5,000 jobs that will see the workforce lowered from 32,000 to 27,000 by 2017 were announced. In May 2014, the company stated it expected to shed 2,200 jobs by June 2014, including those of 100 pilots. Qantas reduced the size of its fleet by retiring aircraft and deferring deliveries, and planned to sell some of its assets. \n\nWith 2,200 employees laid off by June 2014, another 1,800 job positions were planned to be cut by June 2015. Also during 2014, the Qantas Sale Act , under which the airline was privatised, was amended to repeal parts of section 7. That act limits foreign ownership of Qantas to 49 percent, with foreign airlines subject to further restrictions, including a 35-percent limit for all foreign airline shareholdings combined. A single foreign entity can hold no more than 25 percent of the airline's shares. \n\nQantas returned to profit in 2015, announcing a A$557 million after tax profit in August 2015, in contrast with a A$2.84 billion loss the year earlier. In 2015, Qantas sold its lease of Terminal 3 at Sydney Airport, which was due to continue until 2019, back to Sydney Airport Corporation for $535 million. This meant Sydney Airport resumed operational responsibility of the terminal, including the lucrative retail areas. \n\nIt is often claimed that Qantas has never had an aircraft crash. While it is true that the company has neither lost a jet airliner nor had any jet fatalities, it had eight fatal accidents and an aircraft shot down between 1927 and 1945, with the loss of 63 people. Half of these accidents and the shoot-down occurred during World War II, when the Qantas aircraft were operating on behalf of Allied military forces. Post-war, it lost another four aircraft (one was owned by BOAC and operated by Qantas in a pooling arrangement) with a total of 21 people killed. The last fatal accidents suffered by Qantas were in 1951, with three fatal crashes in five months. Qantas' safety record allows the airline to be officially known as the world's safest airline for seven years in a row from 2012 until 2019 and again in 2021 and 2023. \n\nSince the end of World War II, the following accidents and incidents have occurred:\n\nOn 26 May 1971 Qantas received a call from a \"Mr. Brown\" claiming that there was a bomb planted on a Hong Kong-bound jet and demanding $500,000 in unmarked $20 notes. The caller and threat were taken seriously when he directed police to an airport locker where a functional bomb was found. Arrangements were made to pick up the money in front of the head office of the airline in the heart of the Sydney business district. Qantas paid the money and it was collected, after which Mr. Brown called again, advising the \"bomb on the plane\" story was a hoax. The initial pursuit of the perpetrator was bungled by the New South Wales Police Force which, despite having been advised of the matter from the time of the first call, failed to establish adequate surveillance of the pick-up of the money. Directed not to use their radios (for fear of being \"overheard\"), the police were unable to communicate adequately. \n\nTipped off by a still-unidentified informer, the police arrested an Englishman, Peter Macari, finding more than $138,000 hidden in an Annandale property. Convicted and sentenced to 15 years in prison, Macari served nine years before being deported to Britain. More than $224,000 remains unaccounted for. The 1986 telemovie Call Me Mr. Brown , directed by Scott Hicks and produced by Terry Jennings, relates to this incident. On 4 July 1997 a copycat extortion attempt was thwarted by police and Qantas security staff. \n\nIn November 2005, it was revealed that Qantas had a policy of not seating adult male passengers next to unaccompanied children. This led to accusations of discrimination. The policy came to light following an incident in 2004 when Mark Wolsay, who was seated next to a young boy on a Qantas flight in New Zealand, was asked to change seats with a female passenger. A steward informed him that \"it was the airline's policy that only women were allowed to sit next to unaccompanied children\". Cameron Murphy of the NSW Council for Civil Liberties president criticised the policy and stated that \"there was no basis for the ban\". He said it was wrong to assume that all adult males posed a danger to children. The policy has also been criticised for failing to take female abusers into consideration. \n\nIn 2010, when British Airways was successfully sued to change its child seating policy, Qantas argued again that banning men from sitting next to unaccompanied children \"reflected parents' concerns\". In August 2012, the controversy resurfaced when a male passenger had to swap seats with a female passenger after the crew noticed he was sitting next to an unrelated girl travelling alone. The man felt discriminated against and humiliated before the other passengers as a possible paedophile . A Qantas spokesman defended the policy as consistent with that of other airlines in Australia and around the globe. \n\nIn 2006, a class action lawsuit, alleging price-fixing on air cargo freight, was commenced in Australia. The lawsuit was settled early in 2011 with Qantas agreeing to pay in excess of $21 million to settle the case. \n\nQantas has pleaded guilty to participating in a cartel that fixed the price of air cargo. Qantas Airways Ltd. was fined CAD $155,000 after it admitted that its freight division fixed surcharges on cargo exported on certain routes from Canada between May 2002 and February 2006. In July 2007, Qantas pleaded guilty in the United States to price fixing and was fined a total of $61 million through the Department of Justice investigation. The executive in charge was jailed for six months. Other Qantas executives were granted immunity after the airline agreed to co-operate with authorities. \n\nIn 2008, the Australian Competition & Consumer Commission fined the airline $20 million for breaches of the acts associated with protecting consumers. In November 2010 Qantas was fined 8.8 million euros for its part in an air cargo cartel involving up to 11 other airlines. Qantas was fined NZ$6.5 million in April 2011 when it pleaded guilty in the New Zealand High Court to the cartel operation. \n\nIn response to ongoing industrial unrest over failed negotiations involving three unions (the Australian Licensed Aircraft Engineers Association (ALAEA), the Australian and International Pilots Association (AIPA) and the Transport Workers Union of Australia (TWU)), the company grounded its entire domestic and international fleet from 5 pm AEDT on 29 October 2011, and employees involved would be locked out from 8 p.m. AEDT on 31 October 2011. However, in the early hours of 31 October, Fair Work Australia ordered that all industrial action taken by Qantas and the involved trade unions be terminated immediately. The order was requested by the federal government amid fears that an extended period of grounding would do significant damage to the national economy, especially the tourism and mining sectors. It was reported that the grounding would have had a daily financial impact of A$20 million, and affected an estimated 68,000 customers worldwide. \n\nIn 2021, the Transport Workers Union took Qantas to court, over the dismissal of 1,685 baggage handlers and cleaners during the COVID-19 pandemic, whose roles were later outsourced. The TWU argued that the airline's actions contravened the Fair Work Act . Qantas claimed it had to make the cuts to ensure the company's survival during the pandemic. In July 2021, the Federal Court of Australia ruled in favour of the TWU. Qantas lost an appeal in May 2022. The case moved to the High Court of Australia in May 2023. In September 2023, the High Court ruled against Qantas, upholding the original Federal Court decision and leaving the airline liable for compensation. After the verdict, Qantas issued an apology to the sacked workers. \n\nQantas has been subject to protests in relation to the deportation of asylum seekers, which led to disruptions of flights. In 2015 activists prevented the transfer of a Tamil man from Melbourne to Darwin (from where he was to be deported to Colombo) by refusing to take their seats on a Qantas flight. It was reported that Qantas banned the student from taking Qantas flights in the future. A nameless head of security from Qantas sent a letter to the Melbourne student's email account saying her \"actions are unacceptable and will not be tolerated by the Qantas Group or the Jetstar Group\". \n\nAlso in 2015, another Tamil man was to be sent from Melbourne to Darwin to later be deported. A protest by the man led to him not being put on the aircraft. A spokesman for Qantas said flight QF838 was delayed almost two hours. A spokesperson from Qantas stated that \"[s]afety and security is the number-one priority for all airlines and an aircraft is not the right place for people to conduct protests.\" Campaigners also asked Qantas to rule out deporting Iraqi man Saeed in 2017. Campaigners have asked Qantas not to participate in the high-profile deportation case of the Nadesalingam family . In response a Qantas spokesperson stated: \"We appreciate that this is a sensitive issue. The government and courts are best placed to make decisions on complex immigration matters, not airlines\". \n\nThe airline has been in a number of disputes with the operators of Perth Airport . In 2018, the airport sued Qantas in the Supreme Court of Western Australia for allegedly underpaying their aeronautical service fees by $11.3 million. The suit was resolved in 2022 with Qantas forced to pay the airport the owed amount plus an additional $9 million. In 2020, Perth Airport had also threatened to cancel several of the airline's leases over unpaid rent between February and May 2020; part of the rental dispute concerned Qantas alleging that Perth Airport had undervalued a Qantas-owned terminal that was sold back to the airport. Qantas had also drawn criticism from both Perth Airport and the Government of Western Australia for delaying an agreed move from their existing isolated terminals to a proposed new terminal in the airport's central precinct; in May 2024, it was confirmed that the airline had come to an agreement to complete the move by 2031, six years after the original agreed timeframe of 2025. \n\nIn April 2022, consumer advocacy group Choice lodged a complaint with the Australian Competition & Consumer Commission (ACCC) concerning the airline's flight credit policy for cancelled flights during the COVID-19 pandemic, which they alleged was \"unfair\" and saw customers issued with flight vouchers with short expiration dates that became unusable due to ongoing travel restrictions. Although more than $1 billion in credit had been claimed by Qantas and Jetstar customers by August 2023, that month the airline was hit with a class action lawsuit by customers still seeking refunds and compensation for flights cancelled during the pandemic. \n\nIn September 2022, Four Corners broadcast an episode titled \"The Inside Story Of the Chaos at Qantas\", detailing passenger service issues and cost cutting by the company. \n\nDuring an August 2023 Australian Senate committee hearing concerning the rising cost of living, CEO Alan Joyce was accused of \"misleading the Australian public\" with the airline's flight credits scheme, among other issues with the carrier. On 31 August 2023, Qantas bowed to public pressure and announced the removal of expiry dates for flight credits issued up to 30 September 2021 as well as giving customers the option of a refund instead, with Joyce admitting in a statement that the airline's implementation of the scheme led to \"people [losing] faith in the process\". \n\nIn March 2023, a report by the ACCC found that the airline was the subject of almost 2,000 complaints over the previous year, with more than 1,300 complaints relating to flight cancellations. The report found that complaints about the airline had risen by 70% from the previous year, and that the ACCC receives more complaints about Qantas than any other business. In August 2023, the ACCC launched legal action against the airline in the Federal Court of Australia for allegedly continuing to advertise and sell tickets for more than 8,000 flights scheduled between May and July 2022 that were already cancelled, as well as delaying informing existing ticketholders of these cancellations. \n\nCourt filings showed that Qantas carried on selling tickets on 71,000 flights due to take off between May 2022 and May 2024 after deciding to scrap them. About 87,000 people bought tickets on the fake departures or were rebooked onto them. As many as 884,000 customers were not informed swiftly that they were down to travel on flights that had already been cancelled. The allegations led to the premature departure of Chief Executive Officer Alan Joyce in 2023. \n\nQantas settled the lawsuit in May 2024, agreeing to pay A$120 million ($82 million) in fines and compensation for selling tickets on flights it had already decided to cancel. On 30 June 2024, Qantas began contacting customers to offer them compensation. Customers who booked Qantas flights scheduled to depart between 1 May 2022 and 10 May 2024 that had already been cancelled will receive $225 for domestic and trans-Tasman flights, and $450 for international flights, on top of any other refund or alternative flight already offered. \n\nGeneral:",
  "In filmmaking , a double is a person who substitutes for another actor such that the person's face is not shown. There are various terms associated with a double based on the specific body part or ability they serve as a double for, such as stunt double, \"dance double\", \"butt double\" and \"hand double\".\n\nA body double or photography double is used in certain specific shots to replace the credited actor of a character. The body double's face is obscured to maintain the illusion that they are the same character; usually by shooting their body at an angle that leaves their face out (such as by showing the body double from the back) or in post-production by superimposing the original actor's face over the body double's. The double's face is usually not seen on-camera, particularly when they do not facially resemble the actor; a wig will usually be employed if the double's hair color is different from that of the main actor. This is in contrast to a stand-in , who replaces an actor for non-filming purposes such as scene arrangement and lighting adjustments. \n\nA body double must sometimes be able to recite his or her lines with the same timing as the actor, and also reproduce the exact physical actions in co-ordination with the other principal actors; usually, doubles must have a strong resemblance to the actor they replace. An extensively used body double, especially when used in cases where the credited actor is unavailable, unwilling to film or has died, is known as a fake Shemp .\n\nA double can be used for cases where special skills are needed—such as playing musical instruments, dancing or other athletic abilities. Also, if only a part of the body is shown, the term for the double might be more specific. A common double is a \"hand double\", who is used to shoot inserts where only the hand or arm is in the shot. These inserts are often shot by the second unit with a double at a later point in production primarily because it allows the main unit to use the lead actors' time more efficiently.\n\nBody doubles are often used for shots involving nudity. The reasons for this vary. Actors' nude bodies may have too many physical flaws and imperfections that would show on camera, especially due to aging, while some actors are uncomfortable performing nude. A common body double is the \"butt double\", mostly used with TV , since whole-body nudity is less common in that medium. The term \"stunt butt\" is also attested, as is \" stunt cock \". \n\nIn some productions, a scene calls for two characters in the same shot who are portrayed by a single actor. A body double can portray one of the characters, while the credited actor plays the other, thus enabling both characters to appear simultaneously on camera. An unusual example of body doubling took place in the movie Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991). A scene requiring Linda Hamilton to appear as two Sarah Connors in the same scene was created by employing Hamilton's identical twin sister Leslie as her double. This has become less common with digital editing currently available which can splice together multiple takes, allowing for an actor to perform as each character in separate takes that are joined to create the image of the characters in same setting, such as with Deep Roy , who portrayed the Oompa-Loompas in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (2005). \n\nThe 1984 film Body Double , directed by Brian De Palma , featured a plot that hinged on the discovery that one character had in fact served as a body double for another. \n\nA stunt double is often a stunt performer , specifically a skilled replacement, used for dangerous sequences or other sophisticated stunts (especially fight scenes ). Stunt doubles may be used in cases where an actor's physical condition or age precludes much activity, or when an actor is contractually prohibited from taking certain risks.\n\nStunt doubles should be distinguished from daredevils, who perform stunts for the sake of the stunt alone, often as a career. Sequences often do not place stunt doubles in the same mortal peril as the characters: for example, harnesses and wires can be digitally removed from the final film.\n\nMany stunt doubles have long production careers as part of a star actor's contractual \"support crew\", along with the star's cooks, trainers, dressers, and assistants. Often stunt doubles have to look like their respective actors, in order to maintain the illusion that it is the actor on-screen. Stunt doubles for Eddie Murphy , John Wayne , Harrison Ford , Steve Martin , Salman Khan and Michael Landon have been associated with their lead actors for decades.\n\nSometimes stunt doubles are cast in small roles apart from the actor they double for. In the episode \" The Trouble with Tribbles \" (1967) of the original Star Trek series (1966-1969), William Shatner 's stunt double Paul Baxley was cast as Ensign Freeman, a minor character primarily seen during a bar fight.\n\nNon-humans are also known to have stunt doubles. For example, Enzo was the stunt double for his aging sire Moose on the sitcom Frasier (1993-2004). Soccer , the Jack Russell terrier on Wishbone (1995-1997), reportedly hated swimming and therefore had stunt doubles. \n\nA dance double performs physically difficult dancing.\n\nThe Black Swan dance double controversy brought significant attention to dance doubles. After the 83rd Academy Awards , in which Natalie Portman won the Oscar for Best Actress for her role in Black Swan (2010) as a ballerina , controversy arose over how much credit for the dancing in the film was being given to her and how much to her \"dance double\", American Ballet Theatre soloist Sarah Lane . \n\nPrior to Black Swan , there had also been dance doubles in other films. In Flashdance (1983), Jennifer Beals ’ dancing was doubled by Marine Jahan and, at one point, the male dancer Crazy Legs for a difficult break dancing sequence. ",
  "The Kawabata evaluation system (KES) is used to measure the mechanical properties of fabrics . The system was developed by a team led by Professor Kawabata in the department of polymer chemistry, Kyoto University Japan.\n\nKES is composed of four different machines on which a total of six tests can be performed: \n\nThe evaluation can include measurement of the transient heat transfer properties associated with the sensation of coolness generated when fabrics contact the skin during wear. The KES not only predicts human response but understands the perception of softness.\n\nThis engineering-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Women's cinema primarily describes cinematic works directed (and optionally produced too) by women filmmakers. The works themselves do not have to be stories specifically about women, and the target audience can be varied.\n\nIt is also a variety of topics bundled together to create the work of women in film. This can include women filling behind-the-scenes roles such as director, cinematographer, writer, and producer while also addressing the stories of women and character development through screenplays (on the other hand, films made by men about women are instead called Woman's film ).\n\nRenowned female directors include Alice Guy-Blaché , film pioneer and one of the first film directors, Agnès Varda , the first French New Wave director, Margot Benacerraf 1959 , the first woman to win the Cannes International Critics Prize and be nominated for the Palme D'Or, Yulia Solntseva , the first woman to win the Best Director Award at Cannes Film Festival ( 1961 ), Lina Wertmüller , the first woman nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director ( 1977 ), Barbra Streisand , the first woman to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Director ( 1983 ), Jane Campion , the first woman to win the Palme D'Or at Cannes Film Festival ( 1993 ), and Kathryn Bigelow , the first woman to win the Academy Award for Best Director ( 2009 ), along with many other female directors from around the world such as Dorothy Arzner , Ida Lupino , Lois Weber , Leni Riefenstahl , Mary Harron , Sofia Coppola , Kira Muratova , Claire Denis , Chantal Akerman , Catherine Breillat , Lucrecia Martel , Lynne Ramsay , Céline Sciamma , Claudia Weill , and Julie Dash . Many successful cinematographers are also women, including Margarita Pilikhina , Maryse Alberti , Reed Morano , Rachel Morrison , Halyna Hutchins , and Zoe White.\n\nWomen's cinema recognizes women's contributions all over the world, not only to narrative films but to documentaries as well. Recognizing the work of women occurs through various festivals and awards, such as the Cannes Film Festival , for example. \n\n\"Women's cinema is a complex, critical, theoretical, and institutional construction,\" Alison Butler explains. The concept has had its fair share of criticisms, causing some female filmmakers to distance themselves from it in fear of being associated with marginalization and ideological controversy. \n\nAlice Guy-Blaché was a film pioneer and the first female director. Working for the Gaumont Film Company in France at the time that the cinema was being invented, she created La Fée aux Choux (1896). The dates of many early films are speculative, but La Fée aux Choux may well be the first narrative film ever released. She served as Gaumont's head of production from 1896 to 1906 and ultimately produced hundreds of silent films in France and the United States. \n\nIn Sweden, Anna Hofman-Uddgren was that country's first female film maker—producing the silent film Stockholmsfrestelser in 1911. She also acted in the film. However, Ebba Lindkvist directed the short drama , Värmländingarna , which premièred in Sweden on 27 October 1910, thus technically making her the first woman film maker, and chronologically, the second ever female feature film director in the world, after Alice Guy-Blaché.\n\nLuise Fleck was an Austrian film director, and has been considered the second ever female feature film director in the world, after Alice Guy-Blaché. In 1911 Luise Fleck directed Die Glückspuppe .\n\nElvira Notari is the first Italian woman director to make a film. Notari's first films are Maria Rosa di Santa Flavia , Carmela la pazza , Bufera d'anime , all made in 1911.\n\nHelen Gardner , a Vitagraph Studios player who had won acclaim for her portrayal of Becky Sharp in the 1910 version of Vanity Fair , was the first film actor, male or female, to form her own production company, The Helen Gardner Picture Players. Gardner's first production was Cleopatra (1912), one of the first American full-length films.\n\nIn 1913 Russian filmmaker Olga Preobrazhenskaya began directing films in the \"Timan and Reingardt\" studio. She is the first Russian woman director. Her first work as a director was the 1916 film Miss Peasant based on the work of the same name by Aleksandr Pushkin .\n\nAmerican-born director, Lois Weber was coached and inspired by Guy-Blaché and found success in creating silent films. Weber is well known for her films Hypocrites (1915), The Blot (1921), and Suspense (1913). Weber's films often focus on difficult social issues. For instance, her film Where Are My Children? (1916) addresses the controversial issues of birth control and abortion . And she questioned the validity of capital punishment in The People vs. John Doe (1916). \n\nMabel Normand was another significant early female filmmaker. She started as an actress and became a producer-writer-director in the 1910s, working on the first shorts Charlie Chaplin did as The Tramp at Mack Sennett 's Keystone Studios . She further collaborated with Sennett on other Keystone films and, during the late 1910s and early 1920s, she had her own movie studio and production company. Other notable actresses who became directors include Grace Cunard and Nell Shipman . The first documented Asian woman director, producer and actress is Marion E. Wong , who created the Mandarin Film Company in 1916. She wrote, directed, produced and acted in The Curse of Quon Guon .\n\nWomen screenwriters were highly sought after in the early years of the cinema. Frances Marion , Anita Loos , and June Mathis all had successful careers in the silent and early-sound eras. Mathis was also the first female executive in Hollywood .\n\nSee Mary Pickford\n\nAs the American cinema became a highly commercialized industry in the 1920s and its content became more and more conventionalized, the opportunities for women producers and directors became fewer and fewer. By the time sound arrived in the US in 1927 and the years immediately after, women's roles behind the camera were largely limited to scriptwriters, costume designers, set decorators, make-up artists, and the like. And the industry's implementation of self-censorship in the form of the Hays Code in 1934 meant that topics such as birth control and abortion were taboo. Dorothy Arzner was the only woman director to survive in this unfriendly environment. She did so by producing well made but formally rather conventional films. Nevertheless, it is possible to trace feminist elements in her films. Film critics find her film, Dance, Girl, Dance , about two women struggling to make it in show business, to be particularly interesting from a feminist perspective. When the film was selected for inclusion in the National Film Registry , it was noted that \"The dancers, played by Maureen O'Hara and Lucille Ball , strive to preserve their own feminist integrity, while fighting for their place in the spotlight and for the love of male lead Louis Hayward .\" Beyond Dance, Girl, Dance , Arzner also worked with some of Hollywood's most formidable actresses—including Katharine Hepburn in Christopher Strong (1933) and Joan Crawford in The Bride Wore Red (1937).\n\nFirst woman to direct a film noir, Ida Lupino , is widely regarded as the most prominent female filmmaker working in the 1950s during the Hollywood studio system. She is best known for directing The Hitch-Hiker . Ida Lupino is also famous for her work as an actress.\n\nThe experimental and avant-garde cinema is the genre considered to be closer to women filmmakers and one that also advances women themes. Annette Kuhn, for instance, noted such special affinity by citing that low investments of money and 'professionalism' have meant that it is more open than the mainstream film industry for women. Both Pam Cook and Laura Mulvey also noted an alignment and alliance of experimental and avant-garde cinema with feminist interest and feminist politics. Specifically, Mulvey explained that mainstream or Hollywood films are unable to provide the experience of contradiction, reinforcing anti-realism and, this is where the avant-garde cinema is useful for women and feminism because they share \"a common interest in the politics of images and problems of aesthetic language.\" \n\nWomen's involvement in the experimental and avant-garde cinema started in the early twentieth century, although it was limited due to the constraints of the social conventions of this period. It was only after the war when women became actively involved in this cinematic genre. Germaine Dulac was a leading member of the French avant-garde film movement after World War I. There is also the case of Maya Deren 's visionary films, which belonged to the classics of experimental cinema and focused on the North-American avant-garde. The contemporaneous trend did not oppose the female filmmakers' entry into avant-garde filmmaking although, in its early years, they did not receive as much critical acclaim as their male counterparts. \n\nShirley Clarke was a leading figure of the independent American film scene in New York in the fifties. Her work is unusual, insofar as she directed outstanding experimental and feature films as well as documentaries. Joyce Wieland was a Canadian experimental film maker. The National Film Board of Canada allowed many women to produce non-commercial animation films. In Europe women artists like Valie Export were among the first to explore the artistic and political potential of videos . Her art works incited controversy due to sexual and feminist qualities. \n\nIn the late sixties, when the second wave of feminism started, the New Left was at its height. Both movements strongly opposed the 'dominant cinema', i.e. Hollywood and male European bourgeois auteur cinema. Hollywood was accused of furthering oppression by disseminating sexist, racist and imperialist stereotypes. Women participated in mixed new collectives like Newsreel , but they also formed their own film groups. Early feminist films often focused on personal experiences. \n\nSecond-wave feminism would reveal itself in different forms in films in the latter part of the 20th century such as with the idea of \"sisterhoods\" in movies (however many of these movies were made by men). Other concepts of second-wave feminism in films involved women's oppression and the difficulty in identifying with the idea of femininity. During this time, feminism in movies would also be represented as a counter-cinema whereby filmmakers would attempt to intentionally deconstruct the model of the classical film. This style of feminist counter-cinema can be seen in the works of artists such as Sally Potter 's Thriller in 1979.\n\nResisting the oppression of female sexuality was one of the core goals of second-wave feminism . Abortion was still very controversial in many western societies and feminists opposed the control of the state and the church. Exploring female sexuality took many forms: focusing on long-time censured forms of sexuality ( lesbianism , sado-masochism ) or showing heterosexuality from a woman's point of view. Liliana Cavani , Birgit Hein , Elfi Mikesch , Nelly Kaplan , Catherine Breillat and Barbara Hammer are some of the directors to be remembered.\n\nA film notable for its empathic portrayal of sex work is Lizzie Borden's Working Girls (1986). Molly, a white lesbian in a stable mixed-race relationship, is a Yale-educated photographer who has chosen to augment her income through sex work in a low-key urban brothel. We accompany Molly on what turns out to be her last day on the job, understanding her professional interactions with her \"johns\" through her perspective, a completely original point of view, since, until Borden's film, sex workers had largely been depicted stereotypically. The story's sympathetic, well-rounded character and situation humanizes sex work, and the film itself combats the anti-pornography stance touted by many second-wave feminists, which Borden rejects as repressive. \n\nTypically women are portrayed as dependent on other characters, overemotional, and confined to low status jobs when compared to enterprising and ambitious male characters (Bussey & Bandura, 1999). Women in cinema are grossly misrepresented and definitely under represented. The roles that men play are the superhero, the wealthy business man or the all-powerful villain. When it comes to the roles females play they tend to be the housewife, the woman who cannot obtain a man, the slut, or the secretary. The true comparison is masculinity versus femininity. The Bechdel test for film is a type of litmus test that examines the representation of women in media. The three factors tested are: 1. Are there at least two women in the film who have names? 2. Do those women talk to each other? 3. Do they talk to each other about something other than a man? (Sharma & Sender, 2014). Many roles that are given to women make them either dependent on the male counterpart or limits their role. Another characteristic of their role placement is that women are twice as likely to have a life-related role rather than a work-related role. Hollywood rarely chooses to have women be the all-powerful boss or to even have a successful career. There have been some examples that break this norm, such as The Proposal by Anne Fletcher . Even in these two films, the male counterpart is a strong role and in both the female lead is reliant on both actors for the storyline. Women do not stand on their own in movies and rarely are the center of attention without a male being there to steal the limelight. Some roles that have been portrayed in recent films have worked against this norm, such as Katniss in Hunger Games and Furiosa in Mad Max: Fury Road (both films are directed by men). These roles break the norm, as women typically are portrayed as dependent on other characters, overemotional, and confined to low-status jobs compared to enterprising and ambitious male characters (Bussey & Bandura, 1999). Women in cinema are grossly misrepresented and underrepresented. \n\nMany women fear(ed) even entering the film industry, let alone produce multiple pieces of work in the industry. It is said that both male and female workers believe hiring women into the industry is taking a big chance, or being risky. There are many discriminatory acts toward women during the hiring process into the industry such as age discrimination and providing them with lower pay rates. Most women workers in the film industry only become freelancers, which in most cases prevents them from creating careers and making a living out of their film/cinematography passion. These are the fear tactics in place, whether purposely or not, to prevent women from thriving in the film industry.\n\nHowever, there is much more gendered discrimination towards women after they receive the job and actually begin to help and/or produce work. Statistics show that there are not many women in senior positions in the industry. Compared to the number of women hired, it is clearly shown that women are not given the chance to keep their jobs for long periods of time. \"However, it is notable that women lost their jobs at a rate that was six times that of men, indicating the particular and heightened vulnerability of women in the industry.\" Women are not being promoted into higher positions as often as their male counterparts and are not even given the chance to stay long enough to get promoted. These are multiple issues happening during the hiring process and even the post-hire experiences of women which may make other women fear entering the industry in the first place.\n\nThe way women are treated in the workplace are also evidence of the inequalities against them in the film industry. Women's pay rates and expectations in their background/experience in cinematography is much different than male workers. There are many scenarios in the industry that displays the woman with more qualifications for the job than the man, yet earns less money for the same job than the man. \"It is worth noting that women in this field are significantly better qualified than their male counterparts, with a greater proportion being graduates and an even more significant difference in the numbers of women, compared to men, with higher degrees (Skillset, 2010a: 6).\" Even the women who are overqualified are treated as if they are not, resulting in them working extra hard to become better and be rewarded as their male counterparts. All of these inequalities and discrimination toward women in the film industry creates a fear for women to even want to enter the industry.\n\nA study done by USC Annenberg researched what it meant to be a female in the film industry, no matter if they were working behind the scenes or were fictional characters. USC Annenberg looked at two test groups for films, the top 100 films every year from 2007 to 2015 and the top 100 films in 2015.\n\nFor the top 100 films in 2015, women were leads and co-leads in 32 of them, while of the 32 films, only 3 of them included a race other than Caucasian. Out of the thousands of speaking roles, only 32 characters were LGBT and of those characters, 40% of them were racially diverse. Female characters were also three times more likely to be seen in a sexual context. \n\nBehind the scenes had similar statistics to the female fictional characters. Female directors, writers, and producers made up 19% of the 1,365 people that it took to create the top 100 films in 2015. The percentage of female writers (11.8%) and producers (22%) can be seen as high compared to female directors (7.5%). Of the 7.5% of female directors, three of them were African American and one was Asian. \n\nFor the top 100 films every year from 2007 until 2015, of the 800 films, 4.1% were directed by females. \n\nWhile there is still a gap between the percent of female and male filmmakers, women tend to be more involved in documentary films. There is a higher percentage of women directing documentaries than women directing narrative films. There came a point where female directors were barely noticed or not recognized at all.\n\nIn the film world, many female filmmakers are not given much attention or chances to show what they are capable of. This issue is still being debated on, but several activists aim to change and overcome this type of inequality. These activists aim to raise awareness and produce a social change to what is currently shown in the media. During the 1990s, many films came about presenting female filmmakers from different nationalities and racial groups. For example, one of the films released that year is called Sisters in Cinema directed by Yvonne Welbon . This documentary was to demonstrate how African American female directors inspect their present spot in the business. By giving these female film directors the opportunity to showcase their work and demonstrate their actions then feminist documentaries will be as equally important to any other documentary. Not only this, but many documentaries tend to showcase different social activists who aim for a social change by raising awareness and reinforcing female film directors.\n\nThe Center of the Study of Women in Television and Film has dedicated 18 years to the study of women in the film industry. An annual report is created, discussing how women have contributed to as filmmakers. Most of the findings from the research shows that, statistically, it says the same from year to year. The highest earning movies of the past 20 years, with the exception of foreign films and reissues, have been monitored and studied by the Celluloid Ceiling to provide information on the contributions and employment of women on these films. According to the Center for the Study of Women in Television and Film at San Diego State University, as of 2017, \"women comprised 18% of all directors, writers, producers, executive producers, editors, and cinematographers working on the top 250 domestic grossing films.\" The same study concluded that in 2017, 10 or more women were given one of these positions in 1% of films, compared to 10 or more men being hired for these jobs in 70% of films. Information from the Celluloid Ceiling shows that more women tend to be employed on film projects directed by women. According to the Duke Journal of Gender Law and Policy, \"in films with at least one female director, women comprised 53% of writers. Conversely, in films with male directors, women comprised just 10% of writers.\" Statistically, female directors generally create films about and for women, and hire women to assume the roles of main characters or protagonists. The Duke Journal of Gender Law and Policy additionally found that \"in 2015, women comprised only 22% of protagonists and 18% of antagonists. Just 34% of major characters and 33% of all speaking characters in the top 100 domestic grossing films were women.\" \n\nThe group also contributes their time to creating articles discussing how women are viewed in film, not only as filmmakers but as fictional characters as well. \n\nMary Harron is a famous woman director from Canada who is active in Hollywood. She first gained recognition with the film I Shot Andy Warhol which premiered at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival . She also directed American Psycho (2000) and The Notorious Bettie Page (2005).\n\nJoyce Wieland is a notable Canadian experimental filmmaker and mixed media artist. She was active from 1950s until 1980s as a filmmaker. In recent years the actress-turned filmmaker Sarah Polley has made several notable films. In 2022, she wrote and directed the film Women Talking , based on the 2018 novel of the same name by Miriam Toews , for which she won the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay . \n\nIn the silent film era American women were heavily involved in cinema in all occupations.\n\nHelen Gardner was the first film actor, male or female, to form her own production company, \"The Helen Gardner Picture Players\". The first feature film by the company was the 1912 film Cleopatra , which she produced and starred in. \n\nAmerican director, Lois Weber is one of the most prolific film directors and producers of the silent era. Weber is well known for her films Hypocrites (1915), The Blot (1921), and Suspense (1913).\n\nMabel Normand was another notable early female filmmaker. She started as an actress and became a producer and director in the 1910s. During the late 1910s and early 1920s, she had her own movie studio and production company. Other notable actresses who became directors include Grace Cunard and Nell Shipman .\n\nDorothy Arzner was the one of the very few women in executive positions to be successful from 1920s until 1940s Hollywood. From 1927 until 1943, Arzner was the only woman director working in Hollywood. \n\nFirst woman to direct a film noir, Ida Lupino , is widely regarded as the most prominent female filmmaker working in the 1950s during the Hollywood studio system. Besides directing, she was also an actress.\n\nUkrainian born American filmmaker Maya Deren directed groundbreaking avant-garde and experimental films in the 1940s including Meshes of the Afternoon (1943). \n\nShirley Clarke was an important and innovative independent filmmaker who shot three feature films in the 1960s — The Connection (1961), The Cool World (1964) and Portrait of Jason (1967).\n\nThe 1970 film Wanda by Barbara Loden is one of the most poignant portraits of alienation in cinema. \n\nJoyce Chopra achieved success as a documentary and feature film director in the 1970s and 1980s. Her film Smooth Talk won the Grand Jury Prize in the Dramatic category at the 1986 Sundance Festival. She also collaborated with director Claudia Weill on her documentary film Joyce at 34 which documented her giving birth. \n\nCritically acclaimed 1978 film Girlfriends by Claudia Weill is a highlight of 1970s women's cinema. In 2019, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\". Due to workplace sexual harassment from producer Ray Stark on the set of her follow-up film It's My Turn (1980), Weill stopped making feature films. \n\nElaine May , Joan Darling , Joan Tewkesbury , Joan Micklin Silver , Karen Arthur and Martha Coolidge are some other notable 1970s film directors.\n\nBarbra Streisand , best known as an actress and singer, directed the film Yentl in 1983, thus becoming the first woman to write, produce, direct, and star in a major studio film. She was the first woman to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Director in 1983.\n\nFilm director Julie Dash achieved great commercial and critical success with her 1991 hit film Daughters of the Dust which was an award winner at the Sundance Film Festival. In 2004, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\n\nKathryn Bigelow works in traditionally male-dominated genres like science fiction, action and horror. Her directorial debut was the 1981 biker drama The Loveless . She became the first woman to win an Academy Award for Best Director and the Directors Guild of America Award in 2010 for The Hurt Locker . In 2013, her film Zero Dark Thirty was met with universal acclaim and grossed $95 million in the United States box office. Bigelow went on to be nominated for Best Director at the BAFTA Awards , Golden Globe Awards and Directors Guild of America Award among others. However, she failed to be shortlisted for the category at the 85th Academy Awards in what was widely seen as a snub . \n\nLizzie Borden is a notable 1980s feminist filmmaker who made films on controversial topics, including sex-work. Some of her notable films include Born in Flames (1983) and Working Girls (1986).\n\nIn the 2000s women directed films made in Hollywood have started making more money than ever, with highest grossing films getting 100 million or even up to billion dollar grosses.\n\nAnne Fletcher has directed seven studio-financed films: Step Up (2006), 27 Dresses (2008), The Proposal (2009) The Guilt Trip (2012), Hot Pursuit (2015), Dumplin' (2018), and Hocus Pocus 2 (2022) which have gone on to gross over $343 million at the US box office and $632 million worldwide. \n\nCatherine Hardwicke 's films have grossed a cumulative total of $551.8 million. Her most successful films are Twilight (2008) and Red Riding Hood (2011).\n\nNancy Meyers has enjoyed success with her five features: The Parent Trap (1998), What Women Want (2000), Something's Gotta Give (2003), The Holiday (2006) and It's Complicated (2009) which have amassed $1,157 million worldwide. Before she started her directorial career she wrote some other successful films like Private Benjamin (1980) for which she was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay , Baby Boom (1987) or Father of the Bride (1991).\n\nSofia Coppola is a critically acclaimed director who has also had financial success. Her directorial debut film Lost in Translation (2003) grossed over $119 million. The Virgin Suicides (1999), Marie Antoinette (2006) and The Bling Ring (2013) were also successful. At the 2017 Cannes Film Festival, Sophia Coppola won the Best Director award for her work on the drama film The Beguiled , becoming the second woman in the festival's history to win the award. Her niece Gia Coppola is also a notable woman filmmaker.\n\nAva DuVernay is the director of the critically acclaimed Selma (2014) as well as the first African American woman to direct a triple-digit-budgeted film, A Wrinkle in Time (2018).\n\nAnother notable modern director Greta Gerwig , has directed two films, Lady Bird (2017) and Little Women (2019), which both earned nominations for the Academy Award for Best Picture. Her third film, Barbie (2023), had the biggest opening weekend for a female director with $162 million at the box office.\n\nJennifer Lee , director of smash hits Frozen and Frozen II , is the first female director of a Walt Disney Animation Studios feature film and the first female director of a feature film that earned more than $1 billion in gross box office revenue.\n\nChloe Zhao is a Chinese born film director who is best known for her work in Hollywood. Zhao became the first Asian woman, the first woman of color and the second woman ever to win Best Director for her 2020 film Nomadland . In 2021 she directed the ensemble cast superhero film Eternals . She moved to Los Angeles from Beijing as a teenager. Her work is heavily censored in China.\n\nHighest grossing women film directors whose films have earned more than 180 million dollars include Nancy Meyers , Elizabeth Banks , Catherine Hardwicke , Betty Thomas , Brenda Chapman , Vicky Jenson , Jennifer Lee , Patty Jenkins , Anna Boden — all of them are US Hollywood filmmakers. \n\nJulie Dash 's Daughters of the Dust (1991) was the first full-length film with general theatrical release written and directed by an African American woman. Since then there have been several African or African-American women who have written, produced or directed films with national release. Neema Barnette ( Civil Brand ), Maya Angelou ( Down in the Delta ), Kasi Lemmons ( Eve's Bayou ), Cheryl Dunye ( My Baby's Daddy ), Stephanie Allain ( Biker Boyz ), Tracey Edmonds ( Soul Food ), Frances-Anne Solomon ( A Winter Tale ) and Dianne Houston ( City of Angels ), Leslie Harris ( Just Another Girl on the IRT ) are among these filmmakers. In 1994 Darnell Martin became the first African American woman to write and direct a film produced by a major studio when Columbia Pictures backed I Like It Like That . \n\nTo date, Nnegest Likké is the first African American woman to write, direct and act in a full-length movie released by a major studio, Phat Girlz (2006) starring Jimmy Jean-Louis and Mo'Nique .\n\nFor a much fuller accounting of the larger history of black women filmmakers, see Yvonne Welbon's 62-minute documentary Sisters in Cinema (2003). \n\nFurthermore, since the revolutionary start of filmmaking, black women filmmakers have continuously struggled and are still struggling to showcase their work on feature films in Hollywood. However, that does not exclude the fact that there were various black women filmmakers who sparked during their time and age because of their phenomenal work behind the scenes. Jessie Maple is considered to be one of the most recognized figure for the civil rights of the African American community and women of color within the film industry. Her film career took off when she first worked as a film editor for the crime drama film Shaft's Big Score (1972) and The Super Cops (1974) which was based on a book. She continued to work as a film editor for several years but eventually became the only black union cameraperson in her time in New York. With her devoted passion for film and activism growing by the day, Maple and her husband, Leroy Patton, created LJ Film productions, Inc. and when on about to produce several short documentaries within the border and context of black representation, such as Black Economic Power: Reality or Fantasy? (1977). Her two major works, Will (1988) and Twice as Nice (1988), were the first ever independent feature films to be solely created and directed by an African American woman. \n\nAlile Sharon Larkin is known as a film director, producer, and writer. She began her film career while earning her master's degree in UCLA in film and television production. One of her first films called Your Children Come Back to You (1979) depicts the ongoing dilemma that a young African American girl faces while choosing between her aunt's desire to take in a European lifestyle while her mother is strictly intact with her African roots and culture. Larkin's second film feature A Different Image (1982) gained her popular recognition and praise, and eventually won a first-place prize from the Black American Cinema Society . Her ongoing success in the film industry gave her the potential and opportunity to form her own production studio in order to create and enhance educational videos and television for young children. Dreadlocks and the Three Bears (1992) and Mz Medusa (1998) are some of the productions produced in her studio during the 1990s. \n\nThe Cameroonian journalist Thérèse Sita-Bella directed a 1963 documentary, Tam-Tam à Paris , and Sarah Maldoror , a French filmmaker of Guadeloupean descent, shot the feature-film Sambizanga in Angola in 1972. But the first African woman film director to gain international recognition was the Senegalese ethnologist Safi Faye with a film about the village in which she was born ( Letter from the Village , 1975). The 1989 Créteil International Women's Film Festival included short films by Leonie Yangba Zowe of the Central African Republic ( Yangba-Bola and Lengue , 1985) and Flora M'mbugu-Schelling of Tanzania . Other African women filmmakers include Anne Mungai , Fanta Régina Nacro ( The Night of Truth , 2004), Tsitsi Dangarembga ( Mother's Day , 2004) and Marguerite Abouet , an Ivorian graphic novel writer who co-directed an animated film based on her graphic novel: Aya de Yopougon (2012). The most successful film in the history of Nollywood , The Wedding Party , was directed by Kemi Adetiba in 2016.\n\nCameroonian-Belgian Rosine Mbakam, who directed two feature-length documentaries, The Two Faces of a Bamiléké Woman (2016) and Chez Jolie Coiffure (2018), has been described as \"one of the foremost filmmakers of creative nonfiction working right now.\" \n\nThe Indian film industry has been an ongoing success since the revolutionary start of their musicals and romantic family dramas. Majority of these popular \"Masala\" films are usually directed by men. Female roles in the filmmaking industry were solely restricted to acting, singing and dancing. However, recently women have stepped up and took the lead as successful directors, producing films mainly revolving around female issues within society. Like majority of women around the world, Women in India have been struggling to prove their point. Films made by women were usually categorized as art films or films of the parallel cinema. Indian women filmmakers could not have full access to funds and film publicity like male filmmakers did. Mainstream cinema in India basically consists of the \" Masala Movies \", which includes several genres such as comedy, action, revenge, tragedy, romance combined to create an entire film. Women continuously face struggles with attempting to get a fraction of the millions of dollars spend of these masala films. This forces women to drift away from the masala genre in order to get some recognition, which can often cause controversies and raises suspicion. \n\nA number of well-known Indian female filmmakers have achieved astounding commercial success from their films, including Mira Nair (active in America), Aparna Sen , Deepa Mehta (active in Canada), Gurinder Chadha (active in the UK), and Manju Borah . However, there are a number of other Indian women filmmakers who have made some remarkable films that go beyond just entertainment; they take advantage of their platform to address a range of social and political issues. Other noteworthy Indian women filmmakers include Vijaya Nirmala , Nisha Ganatra , Sonali Gulati , Indu Krishnan , Eisha Marjara , Pratibha PJaaparmar , Nandini Sikand , Ish Amitoj Kaur , Harpreet Kaur , Leena Manimekalai and Shashwati Talukdar , Rima Das .\n\nDeepa Mehta is a transnational filmmaker whose work in film is recognized internationally at the highest levels. She is mainly active in Canada since 1973. Her moving films have been played at almost every major film festival. She produced the film Heaven on Earth , in 2008, which premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival . Since its release, the film has turned into a useful tool for professionals who specialize in assisting abused women, specifically looking at the circumstances of immigrant women in abusive environments, as it has been screened at conferences of crown attorneys, judges and healthcare workers in order to help them better understand these women's situations. Fire is a story of two sisters in law who go against their traditions and culture aiming to begin a new life together. When the movie was first screened in Bombay, it caused a backlash by a few political parties such as the Shiv Sena . Majority of the theaters stopped screening the film because of the violent mob attacks which caused serious damage to the theatre hall and property. The attackers did not want the film to be screened because it went against their beliefs and was a violation to \"Indian culture\". The Indian society is still not equipped to understand and accept gay and lesbian relationships into their community. On the other hand, there are some who praised Mehta's film for showcasing social issues India was facing.\n\nSome of her other well-known works include her elemental trilogy: Earth (1996), Fire (1998), Water (2005), where dominant masculine values and practices of oppression and exploitation of women are challenged in this compelling three part series. Mehta's film Earth (1998) was inspired from Bapsi Sidhwa 's \" Cracking India \", which was a story revolving the India-Pakistan Partition of 1947 and had a successful outcome. Mehta began working on her last film, Water (2005) , in her trilogy. The movie was set in the 1930s when India was fighting for independence against the British colonial rule. The film portrays a group of widows who struggle with poverty in the city of Varanasi . It also looks at the dynamic between one of the widows, who aims to be free from the social restrictions forced upon widows and a man who is from a lower social class and is a follower of Mahatma Gandhi. Feminist social issues are highlighted, such as the mistreatment of widows, religious misogyny, and child brides in rural parts of India. Mehta was forced to stop the film production because of the political party of Hindu extremists in relation to Bharatiya Janatha Party (BJP), responded by stating that the film tarnishes India's image and was associated in organizing attempt by the Christian church to revolt against Hinduism . She received an Oscar Nomination for Water in 2007. Other notable films of hers are Bollywood/Hollywood (2002), and the adaptation of Midnight's Children (2012). \n\nMira Nair , an accomplished Indian filmmaker, has written, produced and directed a plethora of documentaries. Her unique ability to provoke both western and non-western viewers in a variety of ways has led her to be seen as a non-traditional filmmaker who is not afraid of creating controversy through her work. So Far From India (1983) depicted the story of a young, working Indian immigrant in New York City and his harrowing experience of acculturation. While dealing with his own new struggles in America, he also has to worry about his pregnant wife back home. India Cabaret (1986), is a documentary-style film that lent a voice to strippers or cabaret dancers in Mumbai . Beyond these impressive works, she also has a list of feature films under her belt; her debut feature film, Salaam Bombay! (1988), which detailed the urban devastation created by prostitution and poverty, was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 1988, won the Prix du Publique for most popular entry at the Cannes Film Festival , the Camera D'Or for best first feature, as well as 25 other international awards. \n\nMajority of female filmmakers in India try to change the film industry by bringing in real social issues, instead of the mainstream masala movies that India has been known for. Daman (2001) is directed by Lajma who decided to take on a unique yet distinct theme by raising awareness about marital rape. The leading actress won an award for her outstanding raw performance that revived Indian films that try to raise awareness regarding a serious social issue. \n\nJournalist and director Jocelyne Saab is considered to be a pioneer of Lebanese cinema. She began her career in the 1970s. She directed both documentary and fiction films.\n\nHeiny Srour was the first Arab woman filmmaker to have her film, The Hour of Liberation Has Arrived , screened at the Cannes Film Festival in 1974.\n\nDanielle Arbid is a Lebanese-French filmmaker whose work has been screened at the Cannes Film Festival. Her feature film debut was In the Battlefields (2004).\n\nNadine Labaki is a notable Lebanese film director. Her debut feature film Caramel premiered at the 2007 Cannes Film Festival.\n\nNoura Kevorkian is an Armenian-Lebanese-Syrian writer-director-producer. She was born in Aleppo, Syria but grew up in Lebanon and is a Lebanese citizen. She studied Finance, Near and Middle Eastern Studies, and Cinema at the University of Toronto in Canada. Kevorkian is a filmmaker specializing in documentary and narrative genres for film and television. Her recent film BATATA won a Peabody Award, won the Best Feature Documentary (an Oscar-qualifying Tanit d'Or) at the Carthage Film Festival, the Human Rights Award at the Carthage Film Festival, the Amnesty Award at the Durban International Film Festival, the Audience Award TOP 10 Favourite Films at Hot Docs, and garnered three nominations in the 2023 Canadian Screen Awards.\n\nHaifa Al-Mansour is the first Saudi female filmmaker and is considered to be Saudi's most controversial film creator, especially after her iconic film that created a buzz Wadjda (2012). She completed her undergraduate studies in the American University in Cairo then continued to pursue her master's degree in film production from the University of Sydney in Australia. One of her three successful short films, Women Without Shadows, inspired hundreds of uprising Saudi filmmakers as well as raising questions towards the issue of publicly opening cinemas in Saudi. Her films have been both celebrated and criticized due to the fact that her work brings serious social topics Saudis are struggling with regarding their conservative culture and traditions. \n\nIn Wadjda , the main character, Waad Mohammed decides to go against social norms imposed on a ten-year-old girl in the kingdom. She becomes an outcast because of the bicycle she rides in public. However, the film ends on a light and inspiring note that frees Wadjda from all the social constraints set upon her. Haifa al Mansour reflects a portion of the Saudi society that refuses to accept the submissive traditional way of living. However, Wadjda promotes an amount of freedom for female rights that need more than an overnight change in such a conservative and restricted culture. \n\nIn Japan for a long time Kinuyo Tanaka was the only woman to make feature films. As a director she was active in the 1950s and 1960s. She was able to do this against fierce resistance because she enjoyed a status as star actress.\n\nCurrently, the best-known women filmmaker of Japan may be Naomi Kawase ; 2007 she won the Grand Prix in Cannes , while Memoirs of a Fig Tree , the directorial debut of well-known actress Kaori Momoi , was released in 2006. The sociocritical adventure film K-20: Legend of the Mask by Shimako Sato was her breakthrough into bigger budget cinema; it starred Takeshi Kaneshiro and was released all over the world.\n\nSimilarly in South Korea , Yim Soon-rye landed a box-office-hit with Forever the Moment (2008), while So Yong Kim got some attention for her film In Between Days (2006) and Lee Suk-Gyung made the women-themed and subtly feminist The Day After .\n\nOne of the important fifth-generation filmmakers of China is Ning Ying, who won several prizes for her films; Ning Ying has gone on to realize small independent films with themes strongly linked to Chinese daily life, therefore also being a link between the 5th and 6th generation. The Sixth Generation has seen a growing number of women filmmakers such as Liu Jiayin , best known for her film Oxhide , and Xiaolu Guo ; in 2001 Li Yu directed the first Chinese film which openly portrayed a lesbian relationship Fish and Elephant .\n\nFamous woman filmmaker from Hong Kong Ann Hui has made a wide array of films ranging from the wuxia genre to drama; Ivy Ho and Taiwanese Sylvia Chang also are known names in the Hong Kong industry, while in Taiwan queer filmmaker Zero Chou has gotten acclaim on festivals around the world.\n\nLindan Hu has documented the post- Mao re-emergence of female desire in women's cinema of the 1980s in mainland China. The films Hu considers are Army Nurse directed by Hu Mei and Women on the Long March directed by Liu Miaomiao . \n\nChloe Zhao is a Chinese born Academy Award winning filmmaker who is currently active in Hollywood. She is best known for her 2020 film Nomadland . She moved to Los Angeles from Beijing as a teenager. Her work is heavily censored in China.\n\nYasmin Ahmad (1958–2009) is considered one of the most important directors of Malaysia ; originally a commercial director, she switched to feature films relatively late and gained international acclaim while also stirring controversy among conservatives in her home country.\n\nIn Pakistan, where the film industry is not very big, some prominent directors are working. Conventional film industry has directors like Sangeeta and Shamim Ara who are making films with feminist themes. Especially to Sangeeta's credit there are some issue-based films. Now some new directors from television industry are also coming towards the medium of films. Sabiha Sumar and Mehreen Jabbar are two new names for films in Pakistan. Both of these directors have made films which are not only issue based addressing national issues but also these films have won international awards at different film festivals.\n\nRakhshan Bani-Etemad , a writer and a director, is probably Iran's best known and certainly most prolific female filmmaker. She has established herself as the elder stateswoman of Iranian cinema with documentaries and films dealing with social pathology. Contemporary Iranian poet Forugh Farrokhzad (1935—1967) was also a filmmaker. Her best-known film is The House is Black (Khane siah ast, 1962), a documentary of a leper colony in the north of Iran. Samira Makhmalbaf directed her first film The Apple when she was only 17 years old and won Cannes Jury Prize in 2000 for her following film The Blackboard . Her stepmother Marzieh Meshkini made \"The Day I Became a Woman\" and Samira's sister Hana Makhmalbaf started her career with \"The Joy of Madness\", a behind-the-scenes documentary about Samira's film \" At Five in the Afternoon \", and has subsequently made two features, Buddha Collapsed out of Shame and \"Green Days\", a film about the Green Revolution that was banned in Iran.\n\nRukmani Devi and Florida Jayalath were groundbreaking figures in the early days of Sri Lankan cinema, transitioning from acclaimed actresses to trailblazing producers and directors Rukmani Devi notably starred in the inaugural Sri Lankan talkie, \" Kadawunu Poronduwa \" (1947), while Florida Jayalath began her acting journey with \"Sengawunu Pilitura\" (1951) before venturing into filmmaking. Following suit, veteran actress Ruby de Mel ventured into directing and producing with her debut film, \"Pipena Kumudu\" (1967), and Rohini Jayakody directed her first feature, \"Hangi Hora\" (1968). Despite their initial ventures into filmmaking, they later returned to their acting careers, refraining from further involvement in film production. \n\nSumitra Peries is a veteran film director in Sri Lankan cinema and she is the wife of Lester James Peries . She also held the post of Sri Lanka's ambassador to France, Spain and the United Nations in the late 1990s.\n\nInoka Sathyangani is an internationally acclaimed Sri Lankan film director and producer. In the year 2002, she received many number awards for her maiden effort Sulang Kirilli, which deals with the theme of abortion. The film secured the highest number of awards won by a single film in the history of Sri Lanka's film industry.\n\nAnomma Rajakaruna is an award-wiining Sri Lankan film director. Rajakaruna's work has been recognized both locally and internationally, solidifying her place as a prominent figure in Sri Lankan cinema. \n\nSumathi Sivamohan is fiction and documnatary director. \n\nMarta Rodriguez is a Colombian documentary film maker who was active in the 1970s and 1980s.\n\nDuring the silent era of the 1910s and 1920s, several women in Argentina became filmmakers, something that would not happen for decades after the advent of sound films and the consolidation of the industry in the early 1930s. The most prolific Argentine woman filmmaker of the period arguably was Renée Oro who, unlike her peers, specialized in documentaries , a genre highly dominated by men. The first film directed by a woman was Un romance argentino (1915) by Angélica García de García Mansilla, financed by the Women's Commission of the San Fernando Hospital in Buenos Aires . The first female filmmakers in the country emerged through philanthropic organizations, a typical activity for women from the upper classes . These all-women institutions, known as sociedades de beneficencia (English: \"societies of beneficence\"), promoted festivals in which, in addition to showing the films, there were theatrical or musical numbers. Other pioneers include Emilia Saleny , Antonieta Capurro de Renauld, Elena Sansinena de Elizalde and María B. de Celestini, among others. \n\nThe first woman director of sound films in Argentina was Vlasta Lah , who directed Las furias (1960) and Las modelos (1963). Lah the only woman filmmaker in Latin America during the 1960s. \n\nOne of the most influential figures in the history of Argentine women's cinema was María Luisa Bemberg , . Her directorial debut was Momentos (1981), which was followed by Señora de nadie (1982). One of her most celebrated films was Camila (1984), which was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film , marking the second time an Argentine film was nominated for this award. \n\nLucrecia Martel has been described as \"arguably the most critically acclaimed auteur in Spanish-language art cinema outside Latin America\". Her 2001 film La ciénaga was voted as the greatest film of Argentine cinema by a wide margin in a 2022 poll organized by the specialized magazines La vida útil , Taipei and La tierra quema , which presented at the Mar del Plata International Film Festival . \n\nLucia Puenzo is the other prominent contemporary Argentinean director. In addition, María Victoria Menis has written and directed several critically acclaimed films, including La cámara oscura (2008) and María y el araña (2013).\n\nBrazilian cinema has a number of women directors whose works date from the 1930s.\n\nCléo de Verberena is the first woman director of Brazil. Her directorial debut was O Mistério do Dominó Preto in 1931.\n\nCarmen Santos produced a wide variety of films through her production company starting from 1930 and had her directorial debut in 1948 with Minas Conspiracy .\n\nGilda de Abreu directed her first film O Ébrio in 1946.\n\nBrazilian women directors' most prolific era unfolds from the 1970s. Some contemporary names include: Ana Carolina , Betse De Paula, Carla Camurati , Eliane Caffé , Helena Solberg , Lúcia Murat , Sandra Kogut , Suzana Amaral , Anna Muylaert , Petra Costa , Norma Bengell and Tata Amaral .\n\nWomen filmmakers in Latin America, specifically Mexico suffer from absolute neglect by the film industry and audience. Mimí Derba founded one of the first Mexican production companies, Azteca Films. She had a successful career in vaudeville before entering films. Derba was the first female director in Mexico. Then Matilde Landeta was a Mexican filmmaker and screenwriter, who was the first female to serve in those roles during the Golden Age of Mexican cinema . Her films focused on the portrayal of strong, realistic female protagonists in a patriarchal world. Landeta won an Ariel Award in 1957 for Best Original Story for the film El camino de la vida which she co-wrote with her brother Eduardo. The film also won the 1957 Golden Ariel, the Silver Ariel Film of Major National Interest and Best Direction and two other awards in 1956 in the Berlin International Film Festival under the name of Alfonso Corona Blake . In the 1980s and 1990s things started to take a turn. Women filmmakers in Mexico finally got the opportunity to create and produce professional feature films. The most popular two would be El secreto de Romeila (1988) directed by Busi Cortés and Los pasos de Ana (1990) by Marisa Sistach. These two feature films were considered the doors that opened opportunity for women filmmakers in Mexico as well as created a new genre that people were not familiar with, labeled as 'women's cinema'. The phenomenal growth of 'women's cinema' not only meant that there would be an infinite expansion in the list of female names as filmmakers or creators; in reality, it created a daunting cinematic genre by objectifying women as well as displacing them within the film industry. \n\nMost of the female filmmakers in Mexico recognize as feminists. The primary reason for many of them to commit to being filmmakers was to depict stories of women in their original and true essence as well as to strive in readapting roles of females on the Mexican screen. According to Patricia Torres San Martín, an honorable film scholar, there is a new theme emerging within the film industry in Mexico which is known as the 'new female identity'. This new structural change in cinema created a geographical cultural change in Mexico due to its new emerged eye-opening concept in the film industry. One of Maria Novaro first short films (a school work: An Island Surrounded by Water , 1984) was acquired by the Museum of Modern Art in New York for its permanent film collection and was distributed in the United States by Women Make Movies. Maria's 1994 El Jardín del Edén (The Garden of Eden) obtain her a second nomination for the Ariel Award for Best Picture the first for a woman in Mexico. In the Garden of Eden, three very different women find themselves in the Mexican-American border town of Tijuana, each with her own goal. The women: struggling artist Elizabeth ( Rosario Sagrav ), Jane ( Renée Coleman ), who's looking for her brother, and Serena ( Gabriela Roel ), a widow who just arrived in town with her family in tow. Although the trio come from different cultural backgrounds—Serena is Mexican, Jane is American and Elizabeth is Mexican-American—all three are similarly in search of a new direction.\n\nMariana Chenillo became the first female director to win an Ariel Award for Best Picture back in 2010 for the film Nora's Will . The Ariel is the Mexican Academy of Film Award. In cinema, it is considered Mexico's equivalent to the Academy Awards (\"Oscars\") of the United States. The film's plot revolves around a mysterious photograph left under a bed which leads to an unexpected outcome. Issa López wrote the scripts for several film features, three of them produced in Mexico by the Major Hollywood Studios, and two of those directed by herself; Efectos Secundarios ( Warner Bros. , 2006) and Casi Divas Almost Divas ( Sony Pictures , 2008). Casi Divas is the only Mexican movie to be scored by acclaimed Hollywood composer Hans Zimmer .\n\nIn Belgium, French language is the second most used, and many Belgian filmmakers choose to shoot their films in French, thus their films often gain popularity in France.\n\nChantal Akerman is the most famous Belgian director. As director she debuted with the documentary feature Hotel Monterey in 1973. Her next film was dramatic feature Je Tu Il Elle (1974). Her best-known film is Jeanne Dielman, 23 quai du Commerce, 1080 Bruxelles (1975) about a housewife who earns a living as a prostitute. It premiered at the Cannes Film Festival. The film garnered a cult following in the following decades. Chantal Akerman had a long career as a filmmaker from the year 1968 to 2015, until her death, lasting almost 50 years.\n\nOther notable film directors from Belgium include Lydia Chagoll , Marion Hänsel , Anne Lévy-Morelle , Nadine Monfils , Yolande Moreau , Nathalie Teirlinck , Fien Troch , Chris Vermorcken and Laura Wandel .\n\nMarion Hänsel's film Between the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea (1995) was screened at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nYolande Moreau initially became famous as an actress. In 2004 she debuted as a film director with When the Sea Rises for which she won a César award.\n\nLaura Wandel made her debut as film director with the film Playground (2021) which was screened at Cannes Film Festival where it won the FIPRESCI prize. It was also submitted as the Belgian entry for the best foreign film at the 94th Academy Awards.\n\nFien Troch is a well-known modern Belgian director. Her film debut Someone Else's Happiness (2005) was the Belgian entry at the Academy Awards. Her film Unspoken (2008) premiered at the Toronto Film Festival.\n\nBinka Zhelyazkova was the first Bulgarian woman to direct a feature film with Life Flows Quietly By... in 1957 and was one of the few women worldwide to direct feature films in the 1950s.\n\nIrina Aktasheva, a Russian, made several Bulgarian films during the 1960s and 1970s, including Monday Morning in 1965. Radka Bachvarova was a Bulgarian director of animation. Lada Boyadjieva had two films compete for the Short Film Palme d'Or in 1961 and 1962 . Ivanka Grybcheva made films in the 1970s and 1980s.\n\nOlga Rautenkranzová is the first woman director from Czechoslovakia. In 1918 she directed Kozlonoh and Ucitel orientálních jazyku . Little has been published about her life and career.\n\nThea Červenková is the second Czechoslovak woman film director. In 1919 she directed Monarchistické spiknutí , Náměsíčný , Byl první máj and Zloděj . She was also screenwriter, writer, documentary maker, film actress, film journalist and critic, producer, film company owner and founding partner.\n\nVěra Chytilová was an avant-garde Czech film director and pioneer of Czech New Wave cinema. Banned by the Czechoslovak government in the 1960s, she is best known for her film Daisies (1966).\n\nHermína Týrlová was a prominent Czech director of animated films. She was active between 1928 and 1986. Týrlová produced over 60 films.\n\nThe first Danish feature film to be directed by a woman was Ud i den kolde sne from 1934, directed by Alice O'Fredericks , who would go on to be one of the most prolific Danish film directors. She initially co-directed her films with Lau Lauritzen Jr. , however in the 1940s she started directing films on her own. She is credited with directing more than 70 feature films as well as writing screenplays for more than 30 films making her one is one of the most productive directors in Danish cinema and among her most memorable films are the Far til Fire -films and the filmatization of the Morten Korch novels, which were all very popular during the Golden Age of Danish Cinema . She is also noted for her films focusing on women and women's rights.\n\nIn the 1940s the star actress Bodil Ipsen and the screenwriter Grete Frische joined O'Fredericks in directing mainstream feature films. Ipsen would towards the end of her career co-direct with Lau Lauritsen Jr. and Fische would co-direct Så mødes vi hos Tove with O'Fredericks. She received the Cannes Film Festival Grand Prix for her film The Red Meadows in 1946—the very first year of the festival.\n\nOther prolific Danish directors include Astrid Henning-Jensen , who became the first female director to be nominated for an Academy Award with Paw , Susanne Bier , the first female director to win a Golden Globe , an Academy Award, an Emmy Award and a European Film Award , and Lone Scherfig , whose films have been nominated for Academy Awards, BAFTAs and a European Film Award .\n\nThe oldest Danish film award is named Bodil Award after Bodil Ipsen and Bodil Kjer , and the Alice Award , which is award to the best female director at the Copenhagen International Film Festival is named in honor of Alice O'Fredericks.\n\nGlory Leppänen was the first Finnish woman to direct a film. Her 1936 feature film A Stroke of Luck ( Onnenpotku ) starred Miss Finland Ester Toivonen . As of February 2020, it holds the record for the most cinema-goers of any film directed by a Finnish woman. \n\nAnsa Ikonen , Kyllikki Forssell , and Ritva Arvelo are also among the first Finnish women film directors. Ansa Ikonen, made her directorial debut with the 1944 film Nainen on valttia ( Woman is the Wild Card ). Kyllikki Forssell directed her first film, Onnellinen Perhe ( Happy Family ), in 1953, which was an episode of an anthology titled Shamrock consisting of three short films. Ritva Arvelo's directorial debut came in 1961 with Kultainen vasikka ( The Golden Calf ).\n\nIn the 21st century, new talents have emerged in Finnish cinema. The experimental feature film M (2018), directed by Anna Eriksson and centered on actress Marilyn Monroe , was screened at the Venice International Film Festival. Her follow-up, the dystopian film shot in French about the dying Madame Europe and her Chinese man-machine, W , premiered at the 2022 Locarno Film Festival.\n\nTove (2020), directed by Zaida Bergroth , tells the story of bisexual Moomins creator Tove Jansson . The film received critical acclaim and was Finland's entry for the 2021 Oscars.\n\nThe apocalyptic drama Quarantine (2021), directed by Diana Ringo , was Finland and Russia's entry for the 2022 Golden Globes. Her next film, an adaptation of George Orwell's 1984 , was released in 2023.\n\nHanna Bergholm's body horror film Hatching and the coming-of-age film Girl Picture (2022), directed by Alli Haapasalo , both premiered at the 2022 Sundance Film Festival.\n\nWomen directors active since 2000 include Johanna Vuoksenmaa , Pamela Tola , Auli Mantila , Taru Mäkelä , Selma Vilhunen and Tiina Lymi . Johanna Vuoksenmaa is known for her films 21 Ways to Ruin a Marriage (2013), Upswing (2020), and Adult Camp (2012), as well as the television series Kumman kaa . Pamela Tola, both a director and actress, has directed works such as Swingers (2018) and Ladies of Steel (2020). Auli Mantila, recognized for her work as a director and screenwriter, is best known for her film Geography of Fear (2001) and various television dramas. Taru Mäkelä has directed films including August Fools (2013) and The Storage (2011).\n\nFrance, cinema's birthplace, fostered both its technical and artistic development, notably through a strong tradition of female directors, with three pioneers, representing cinema's beginning, middle, and end, leaving a lasting heritage.\n\nFemale director, Alice Guy was existent during the birth of cinema. Germaine Dulac was around Avant-Garde cinema during the 1920s. Lastly, Agnés Varda (1954) came along the movement of the New Wave . \n\nAmong the best known French women film makers are Agnès Varda , Claire Denis , Alice Guy-Blaché , Germaine Dulac , Jacqueline Audry , Catherine Breillat , Nelly Kaplan and Diane Kurys . Others include Julia Ducournau , Céline Sciamma , Mia Hansen-Løve , Mati Diop , Pascale Ferran , Agnès Jaoui , Noémie Lvovsky , Tonie Marshall , Coline Serreau , Danièle Huillet and Danièle Thompson .\n\nIn the silent era French women directors were highly prominent. Alice Guy-Blaché directed around 700 films and is credited with introducing the narrative form with her film La Fée aux Choux (1896).\n\nAlice Guy was a secretary to Leon Gaumont before the making of her very own first film, which was a year later after the birth of cinema, 1854 to be exact. \n\nSince Alice Guy was working for Gaumont, she was responsible in the production side of the company for being the director, the filmmaker, and set manger. From being a secretary to a head she had created 406 films during this period of time. Most of her films were between 20 and 90 minutes, for a film to be created for this long during this time would be considered to be a short film, but knowing the fact that it was made earlier before is exceptional during the early years. Alice Guy had the chance to shoot some of her films in a different way than Gaumont's forerunner the Lumiere Brothers . The brothers were mostly interested in shooting films which would show what the cameras can capture on a technical level and not what they can express in a deeper extent; for example having repetitive and monotonous shots of trains or the military marching. Guy was not so interested in repetitiveness in films, although she was slightly influenced by them, she had decided to think of something better and comedic. Here she gave in a bunch of short comedic films to Gaumont and he approved of her films. In 1906 she directed the comedic short film The Consequences of Feminism which depicted a world where traditional gender roles are inverted. Within a year of her submission of short films, they have become a complete success. Her film La Passion or so called La Vie du Christ (1906) was a work of art on which she has worked on for years. This has included 25 sets along with a number if exterior areas and around or over 300 crowd scenes. \n\nGermaine Dulac was one of the most creative art film directors and went on to be the leader of the French cinéclub movement. Dulac had studied music first then became a film logician and a journalist. She focused closely on still photography just before the making of her very own first film in the year 1926. \n\nAt the time where Germain Dulac was shooting to make her first film in 1916, the film industry in France was in an unusual state because of the early booming that has happened in 1901–1904. During 1910, around sixty to seventy percent of films were sent out worldwide from Paris, however, during 1914 the industry started to decline these films because it lacked investment and production tools for practices. Later on over the years in 1920, the new cinema in France began because of avant-garde filmmaking and the first movement of film theory, in which Dulac was interested in. Dulac started off as a journalist for feminist journals La Fraciase and La Fronde and later became interested in still photography which made her contemplate about the connection between the camera lens and feminism. She was highly influenced by music in her early life, which she incorporated in films to visually see the movement of music. She had made her films sound poetic to show and express emotion and her experience as a feminist journalist affected her work when depicting female characters. One of her best known films is La Souriante Madame Beudet ( The Smiling Madame Beudet ) created in 1923 which came to be a landmark feminist film. The film's plot revolves around a hard-working female in a loveless marriage. \n\nMusidora was another French film pioneer—she was an actress, film director and screenwriter. She directed films in the 1910s and 1920s.\n\nMarie-Louise Iribe started as an actor in silent films and later owned a production company and directed significant feature films in the 1920s-1930s.\n\nJuliette Bruno-Ruby directed two films in the 1920s.\n\nMarie Epstein was an actress, screenwriter, film director, and film preservationist. She directed films throughout 1920s until 1950s. She often collaborated with her brother, Jean Epstein .\n\nSolange Térac directed three films. Her directorial debut was in 1932 with La vagabonde . She is best known for the film Koenigsmark (1953).\n\nAndrée Feix debuted as director with the film Once is Enough (1946). She also directed Captain Blomet (1947).\n\nNicole Védrès directed two feature documentaries, Paris 1900 (1947) and La Vie Commence Demain (1950). Paris 1900 was screened at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nJacqueline Audry directed numerous literary adaptations. Her directorial debut was The Misfortunes of Sophie in 1946. Her films often dealt with controversial topics which included extramarital sex such as Mitsoi (1956) and lesbian romance drama Olivia (1951). Olivia was a groundbreaking film in terms of lesbian representation at the time. She has directed sixteen films altogether and was the first commercially successful woman director of post-war France. \n\nInitially Agnés Varda had an intense interest in art history at first, and only later she turned towards film and photography in 1954. Her directorial debut was La Pointe Courte (1955) which has been described as the first French New Wave film. Varda is best known for her New Wave masterpiece Cléo from 5 to 7 (1962). It was screened at the 1962 Cannes Film Festival. Another acclaimed film by Varda was Vagabond (1985). Vagabond is considered one of Varda's greater feminist works. She also directed various documentaries during her career. As one of the most active filmmakers of all time, her directing career lasted five decades.\n\nIn 1959 writer Marguerite Duras wrote the script for Alain Resnais ' Hiroshima Mon Amour . Her script was nominated for the Best Screenplay category at the 1959 Academy Awards. She turned to directing with La Musica in 1966.\n\nDirector Danièle Huillet together with her husband made two dozen films between 1963 and 2006. From the Clouds to the Resistance was screened at the 1979 Cannes Film Festival.\n\nSuzanne Schiffman was a screenwriter, script-girl and film director. She is known for her close collaboration with Francois Truffaut . Her directorial output consists of three films. Her directorial debut was in 1971 with Out 1 (co-directed with Jacques Rivette).\n\nPaula Delsol had her directorial debut in 1962 with La Dérive . The film had themes of female sexual liberation.\n\nFilm director and writer Marceline Loridan-Ivens directed various documentaries in the 1960s and 1970s. She survived Auschwitz-Birkenau . Her director debut was in 1962 with Algérie, année zéro .\n\nNoteworthy women filmmakers to emerge from the 1970s include Catherine Breillat , Diane Kurys , Nelly Kaplan , Coline Serreau , Nadine Trintignant , Marion Sarraut , Rachel Weinberg , Véra Belmont , Josée Dayan , Liliane de Kermadec , Sarah Maldoror , Ariane Mnouchkine , Christine Lipinska , Jeanne Labrune , Chantal Akerman , Jeanne Moreau , Euzhan Palcy , Danièle Thompson .\n\nColine Serrau's directorial debut was in 1974. Her biggest commercial success was Three Men and a Cradle (1985) which was later remade in Hollywood . She received three César Awards for the film.\n\nDiane Kurys' directorial debut coming-of-age film Peppermint Soda was awarded at the 1977 Cannes Film Festival.\n\nDelphine Seyrig was an openly feminist filmmaker active in the 1970s known for her documentary Sois belle et tais-toi released in 1981.\n\nFeminist filmmaker Catherine Breillat is well known for her frank depictions of sexuality and taboo topics in film and for her coming of age works. She faced censorship and controversy during most of her career. Her debut film A Real Young Girl was banned for several decades due to graphic sexuality. Her best known films are A Real Young Girl (1976), Romance (1999) and Fat Girl (2001). In 2007 her film The Last Mistress was selected at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nJeanne Moreau , best known as an actress, directed two feature films in the 1970s— Lumière in 1976 about female friendship and The Adolescent in 1978 about a young girl's coming-of-age. Another iconic actress, Anna Karina had her directorial debut in 1973 with Vivre ensemble which was screened at the Cannes Film Festival. In 2008 she directed and starred in the film Victoria .\n\nNotable directors to debut in the 1980s – Claire Denis , Catherine Corsini , Tonie Marshall , Claire Devers , Patricia Mazuy , Agnès Merlet , Sólveig Anspach , Juliet Berto , Josiane Balasko , Laurence Ferreira Barbosa .\n\nClaire Denis is one of the most acclaimed French directors to emerge from the late 1980s. Her film debut Chocolat premiered at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival. Her film Beau Travail received rave reviews at the time of its release. In 2022 she won the Grand Prix at Cannes for Stars at Noon . Her career has lasted over three decades.\n\nDirector Yolande Zauberman had her debut in 1988 with Classified People . She won an award for Me Ivan, You Abraham at the 1993 Cannes Film Festival.\n\nFilmmaker Catherine Corsini began directing films in the 1980s. Her films Replay (2001) and Three Worlds (2012) screened at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nDirector and screenwriter Pascale Ferran had her feature directorial debut with Coming to Terms with the Dead in 1994 which won the Caméra d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival. Her film Bird People (2014) was screened at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nIn 2000 Tonie Marshall was the first woman to receive the César award as Best Director. Her directorial debut film was Pentimento (1989).\n\nLisa Azuelos is a well known French director who directed her first film in 1993. Her film LOL (Laughing Out Loud) (2008) was remade in Hollywood in 2012 .\n\nMarion Vernoux directed her first film in 1994. She is best known for her 1999 film Empty Days .\n\nSylvie Verheyde had her directorial debut in 1997. Her 2012 film Confession of a Child of the Century was screened at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nModern French directors to become well known in the 2000s and later include Cannes Film Festival winners Julia Ducournau , Céline Sciamma , Mia Hansen-Løve and Mati Diop , Marie Amachoukeli , Rebecca Zlotowski , Claire Burger , Julie Lopes-Curval , Houda Benyamina , Justine Triet .\n\nOther notable directors include Virginie Despentes , Valérie Donzelli , Alix Delaporte , Marie-Castille Mention-Schaar , Marion Laine , Léa Mysius , Sophie Barthes , Marina de Van , Houda Benyamina , Karin Albou , Mona Achache , Lola Bessis .\n\nMany famous actors decide to later on undertake directing duties. Fanny Ardant , Sophie Marceau , Julie Delpy , Zabou Breitman , Maïwenn and Isild Le Besco , Valeria Bruni Tedeschi , Zabou Breitman, Marilou Berry , Sylvie Testud , Brigitte Sy , Emmanuelle Bercot — are all well-known actresses who started to also direct films in the 2000s.\n\nLuise Fleck was an Austrian film director, and considered the second ever female feature film director in the world, after Alice Guy-Blaché. Luise Fleck worked with her husband Jacob and they both shared director credits. In 1911 Luise Fleck directed Die Glückspuppe .\n\nAustrian filmmaker Leontine Sagan is a notable director who worked in Germany.\n\nContemporary Austrian women directors include Barbara Albert , Jessica Hausner , Marie Kreutzer and Katharina Mückstein . Films by Hausner have been screened at the Cannes Film Festival and at Berlinale.\n\nKatharina Mückstein is a notable feminist and metoo activist, who has been vocally critical of sexual harassment in the Austrian film industry.\n\nFeminist artist and experimental filmmaker Valie Export is notable for her video art works made in the 1970s. Her work was groundbreaking at the time and aroused controversy in the conservative Austrian art world. \n\nLotte Reiniger was a German film director and the foremost pioneer of silhouette animation. Her best known films are The Adventures of Prince Achmed , (1926), the first feature-length animated film, and Papageno (1935).\n\n1931 film Girls in Uniform by Leontine Sagan is one of the earliest narrative films to explicitly portray homosexuality. The film is about a 14-year-old girl who falls in love with her female teacher at an all-girls boarding school.\n\nActress and director Leni Riefenstahl is best known for making the infamous 1935 Nazi propaganda film Triumph of the Will which despite its controversial nature is still considered as one of the greatest films of all time due to its technical and visual innovations.\n\nGerman woman filmmakers Helke Sander and Cristina Perincioli are also pioneers of the feminist movement. A feminist newspaper Frauen und Film was founded in 1974 by Helke Sander. \n\nOther prominent female film-makers include Margarethe von Trotta and Helma Sanders-Brahms who both began their careers in the 1970s. Monika Treut has also won recognition for her depictions of queer and alternative sexuality. Contemporary German women directors of note include Maren Ade , Doris Dörrie , Frauke Finsterwalder , Katja von Garnier , Nicolette Krebitz , Caroline Link and Angela Schanelec .\n\nAnna Indermaur is the first woman film director from Switzerland. Indermaur opened the Nord-Süd cinema studio in 1935.\n\nUrsula Meier is a notable modern Swiss film director. Her films have been screened at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nIn Hungary film director and screenwriter Marta Meszaros has been making important films for decades, starting from 1968 until 2020. Her full-length directorial debut, Eltavozott nap/The Girl (1968), was the first Hungarian film to have been directed by a woman. Meszaros is best known for her 1984 Cannes Film Festival winning picture Diary for My Children .\n\nDirector Ildikó Enyedi is known for her 2017 film On Body and Soul which won the top prize at the 67th Berlin International Film Festival and went on to be nominated for a Foreign Language Academy Award. She has directed eight feature films since 1989.\n\nElvira Notari was a pioneer of Italian cinema, and she was followed by other prominent female directors as Lina Wertmüller and Liliana Cavani . Countess Marina Cicogna is the first female European producer. \n\nElvira Notari is the first Italian woman director to make a film. She has directed more than sixty feature films and about 100 documentaries. Notari's first films are Maria Rosa di Santa Flavia , Carmela la pazza , Bufera d'anime , all made in 1911.\n\nDirector Diana Karenne was a Polish film pioneer, who directed many of her films in Italy. Her film debut was Lea in 1916 which she directed in Italy. In 1917 she opened her film production company in Milan.\n\nLina Wertmüller is best known for her satiric films Swept Away (1974) and Seven Beauties (1975). With Seven Beauties Wertmüller became the first female director to be nominated for the Academy Award as Best Director.\n\nLiliana Cavani is best known for her controversial film The Night Porter (1974). Set in Vienna in the 1957, the film centers on the sadomasochistic relationship between a former Nazi concentration camp officer and one of his inmates. The film starred Dirk Bogarde and Charlotte Rampling . In 2002 Cavani directed Ripley's Game starring John Malkovich , based on the novel of the same name by Patricia Highsmith .\n\nAlice Rohrwacher is a notable modern film director from Italy whose films were award winners at the Cannes Film Festival. Her best known films are The Wonders (2014) and Happy as Lazzaro (2018).\n\nNorwegian actress Aud Egede-Nissen opened her own production company in 1917 and produced at least 29 films.\n\nEdith Carlmar is Norway's first woman director. Her directorial debut was Death Is a Caress in 1949. Her last film featured the debut of actress Liv Ullmann . Liv Ullmann herself turned to directing in the 1990s.\n\nNotable directors who emerged in the 1960s-1970s period include Anja Breien , Vibeke Lokkeberg , Laila Mikkelsen and Unni Straume .\n\nEva Dahr had her directorial debut with the film Burning Flowers in 1985. She was also a prolific director of short films.\n\nNorwegian director Deeyah Khan who debuted in 2012 is a two-time Emmy Award winner, two time Peabody Award winner, a BAFTA winner and has received the Royal Television Society award for Best Factual Director.\n\nDirector Anne Sewitsky's 2010 film Happy, Happy was Norway's submission to the Academy Awards.\n\nMaria Sødahl is best known for her 2019 film Hope .\n\nDirector Mona Fastvold's directorial debut The Sleepwalker (2014) was screened at the Sundance Film Festival. She is based in the US.\n\nNina Niovilla was the first Polish female film director and the only female director of the silent film era in Poland. She debuted in 1918 with the film Die Heiratsannonce .\n\nDirector Diana Karenne was another Polish film pioneer, who directed most of her films abroad, in Italy, Germany and France. Her film debut was Lea in 1916 which she directed in Italy.\n\nWanda Jakubowska was a Polish film director best known for her work on the Holocaust. Her 1948 film The Last Stage was an early and influential depiction of concentration camps. It was filmed on location at Auschwitz, where Jakubowska had been interned. Jakubowska was active as a director for more than 50 years, starting from 1932 until 1988.\n\nAgnieszka Holland is a notable modern film director who has been active in cinema since 1973. Her films have been screened at the Cannes Film Festival and the Berlin International Film Festival. Her sister Magdalena Łazarkiewicz and daughter Kasia Adamik are both film directors.\n\nOther Polish film directors include Maria Kaniewska , Agnieszka Smoczyńska , Urszula Antoniak , Małgorzata Szumowska , Ewa Petelska , Teresa Kotlarczyk , Anna Kazejak-Dawid , Dorota Kobiela .\n\nBárbara Virgínia became the first woman film director of Portugal in 1945 with the film Três Dias Sem Deus . It was screened at the Cannes Film Festival.\n\nPortuguese editor and director Manuela Viegas ' 1999 film Gloria , premiered in competition at the 57th Berlinale , is considered in her country the climax of a cinema of feminine sensibility. Other Portuguese female film directors include Teresa Villaverde , Catarina Ruivo , Raquel Freire , Margarida Gil , Cláudia Tomaz and Rita Azevedo Gomes . The current president of the Portuguese Directors Association is Margarida Gil. \n\nRussian cinematography has seen a number of women directors who created nationally and internationally acclaimed movies. The first Russian moving picture produced by a female director came out in 1910s. Olga Preobrazhenskaya was introduced into the fledgling film industry by Yakov Protazanov . In 1913 Olga Preobrazhenskaya began directing films in the \"Timan and Reingardt\" studio. Her first work as a director was a joint effort with actor, screenwriter and director Vladimir Gardin —in 1916, they filmed Miss Peasant based on the work of the same name by Pushkin . As Olga Preobrazhenskaya put it, \"the film came out, it was praised, but since it was the first production of a woman director, it was treated with distrust, and on the posters and reviews my name was often written with a male ending or attributed to the production of other directors.\" In the first years after the Revolution, Olga Preobrazhenskaya was also the first woman to teach directing: she taught classes at the State School of Cinematography (now VGIK) . Preobrazhenskaya's most successful work is the drama Women of Ryazan (1927), which the writer Theodore Dreiser, who visited the USSR at the time, called a miracle. The film was about the difficult life of an ordinary Russian peasant woman in the countryside on the eve and after the revolution. Preobrazhenskaya created this picture together with the director Ivan Pravov, as many of her other films, designed in the spirit of socialist realism: And Quiet Flows the Don , Stepan Razin , The Lad from the Taiga .\n\nBrumberg sisters were pioneer animators. They were active between 1925 and 1970. In a career lasting almost 50 years, they created around 50 films as animation directors, animators and screenwriters.\n\nNadezhda Kosheverova was considered the greatest fairy tale director of the Soviet cinema. In spite of the fact that the director tried herself in different genres, from realistic ( Galya ) to comedies ( Tamer of Tigers ), it was in the fairy tale genre that her talent revealed itself most fully. The most famous of her ten works in this genre is Cinderella released in 1947, filmed together with Mikhail Shapiro on the script of Evgeny Schwartz . Cinderella was, perhaps, the first fairy tale in the history of the Soviet cinema, devoid of any ideological overtones, but at the same time reflecting with mild satire the features of the Soviet way of life. For example, in the stepmother, played by Faina Ranevskaya , one may easily recognize the exemplary communal activist. And also for the first time in the Soviet cinema aristocratic heroes—King Erast Garin and Prince Alexei Konsovsky—are not portrayed as caricatured negative characters.\n\nMargarita Barskaya was the first director who succeeded in showing the world through the eyes of a child. In 1933, she released Tattered Shoes , the first sound film for children in the history of the world cinema. It told the story of children growing up in a conventional European country where the fascist regime came to power. After the film's release, Barskaya was immediately talked about as a new, original talent, and much later, almost as a forerunner of Italian neo-realism. Viewers were delighted by how casually children behaved in the frame, as if not noticing the lens—the credit goes to Barskaya who developed her own system of working with young actors. Margarita Barskaya was the initiator of the world's first children's film studio \"Soyuzdetfilm\", where a full-length film Father and Son was shot. It never appeared on the screens: the critics branded the picture as \"fake\", because Barskaya, true to her style, reflected the life of a Soviet family without embellishment. The director was no longer allowed to shoot—mainly because of her friendship with the disgraced oppositionist Karl Radek, as a result, the film Father and Son was the last work of Barskaya.\n\nFilmmaker Yulia Solntseva , before becoming a famous director, managed to attract attention as an actress thanks to her main roles in silent films Aelita and The Cigarette Girl from Mosselprom . The most famous work of Solntseva was Poem of the Sea , filmed in 1958 from a script by her husband, director Alexander Dovzhenko , in which the director presented the construction of the Kakhovka hydroelectric station in the style of an ancient Greek epic. Another notable work by Solntseva was the first wide-screen film in Europe, Chronicle of Flaming Years (1960), which won the award for best director at Cannes.\n\nIskra Babich , a 1958 graduate of VGIK, was a favorite student of director and teacher Ivan Pyryev . She had only four full-length films in her filmography – all four melodramas. Babich made penetrating films about love, conscience and kindness—but without excessive expression and eccentric plots. The director's most famous film is Muzhiki! (1982), which won many awards and achieved international recognition.\n\nDinara Asanova , a student of Mikhail Romm , is known as a director who accurately shows the conflicting nature of an adolescent. Two of her most famous films—a lyrical story about unrequited love Woodpeckers Don't Get Headaches (1975) and a drama about young hooligans Boys (1983), which featured amateur actors, real troubled teens. After the movie Asanova began to receive packs of letters: people were asking for advice, believing that the director was a qualified specialist in the education of \"difficult children\". However, Asanova's only task was to show that the transition period between adolescence and youth is not a rehearsal for \"real\", adult life, but an important part of our only, big, life.\n\nLarisa Shepitko was one of the central figures of the Soviet cinema in the 1960s and '70s. One of her most acclaimed films, Wings , released in 1966, reflected on the fate of front-line soldiers. The war veteran in the film was a woman, a former aviator Nadezhda Petrukhina, who after the war became the director of a vocational school. The main character, forced to abandon the sky, had to live by the new rules, which did not have the moral clarity inherent in wartime, which eventually brought her to an existential dead end, like many in her generation. In order to shoot her main film, The Ascension (1976), Shepitko had to confront the authorities. The film became the first Soviet picture to win the \"Golden Bear\" at the Berlin International Film Festival.\n\nTatiana Lukashevich debuted as a film director at the age of 24: her film Ivan Karavaev's Crime was more like an artistically designed film propaganda than an artistic statement, but it still drew attention to the young director. Later Lukashevich made mostly films that contributed to the \"moral education of the younger generation\" (\"Gavrosh\", \"The Foundling\", \"The Maturity Certificate\"). Despite the director's strict adherence to the canons of socialist realism, such values as humanity and genuineness were always in the foreground in Lukashevich's films. This is most noticeable in the film The Foundling, whose main idea is expressed in the lines of a lullaby: \"In our big city, everyone is kind to the baby.\"\n\nFor Aida Manasarova, perhaps the most important thing in her work was the careful avoidance of everything too idealistic and far-fetched. According to Manasarova, it was \"much more important for her to show the real drama of the search for moral ideals,\" so her characters were never one-dimensional and positive. Almost all of her films told about people experiencing a deep inner crisis. \"I like heroes who are tormented by their imperfection,\" Manasarova admitted. One of the highlights of the directors works is a family drama \"Look away\" (1983) about the difficult relationship between mother and son.\n\nSeventeen Moments of Spring , one of the most famous and nationally acclaimed series known in the Soviet cinema, was also made by a female director Tatyana Lioznova . However, the director is known not only for the story of the popular Soviet spy. A key character in all her works was a man who finds himself in unnatural conditions, a white crow, who is tested for his resilience, and not always successfully. Nyura from the film Three Poplars in Plyushchikha in 1967 who never found love; Nina from Carnival (1981) who returned to her small town, not having achieved any success as a great actress; Lenya from the film We, below (1980) who failed at collecting the signatures he so badly needed. This combination of stubbornness and humility is characteristic of her films. As the playwright Alexander Gelman put it, \"her films are sincere, the truth of the soul in them surpasses the truth of facts, as it happens in life with real people.\"\n\nAlla Surikova is notable for directing many successful comedy films. Her most popular film is the satiric Red-Western A Man from the Boulevard des Capucines (1987).\n\nKira Muratova always strove to make films which she herself wanted to create, irrespective of changes of political agenda, regimes and aesthetic guidelines. This led to her first films— Brief Encounters (1967) and The Long Farewell (1971) getting shelved; the third, Getting to Know the Big, Wide World (1979), was never shown in wide distribution, and the fourth, Among Grey Stones (1983), heavily cut down by censorship, and released under the pseudonym of Ivan Sidorov. Finally, The Asthenic Syndrome (1989), released as Muratova wanted, brought her worldwide acclaim. Today Muratova is one of the most acclaimed Soviet directors.\n\nThere are many new and important names in the strong Russian female tradition of filmmaking in the 21-century, and the number is constantly increasing.\n\nSvetlana Baskova gained nationwide notoriety for directing the exploitation shock-horror film The Green Elephant in 1999.\n\nRenata Litvinova , initially famous as an actress in Kira Muratova's films, honed her directorial skills in Goddess: How I fell in Love (2004) and The Last Tale of Rita . Her latest notable work is the 2021 feature The North Wind . Litvinova usually also stars in her films.\n\nOne of the most popular modern Russian directors Anna Melikyan , is known as author of Sundance winner Mermaid (2007), and satiric romantic drama The Three (2020).\n\nDirector Avdotya Smirnova, initially known as a screenwriter, is the author of the films Two Days (2011), Story of One Appointment (2018) and biopic series Vertinskiy (2021) about the famous Russian singer .\n\nOksana Bychkova, is best known as director of the romantic drama Piter FM (2006).\n\nValeriya Gai Germanika , one of the most provocative names in the Russian film industry, initially only directed documentary films. She is well known for her Cannes Film Festival winning feature Everybody Dies but Me (2008). Her latest work, series Mutual Consent (2022) about a raped schoolteacher has been described by the authors as the first MeToo series from Russia.\n\nDiana Ringo , is director of the dystopia film Quarantine (2021) starring Anatoly Bely . Quarantine is a philosophical and experimental art-house film about a man who lives in a bunker for 20 years. Diana Ringo is the director, producer, screenwriter, and composer of the film's score. Besides directing, Diana Ringo is also a professional musician and composer.\n\n2021 film Gerda about a young striptease dancer by director Natalya Kudryashova premiered at the Locarno Film Festival where it received several awards. Kudryashova is also active as an actress.\n\nNatalya Merkulova is well-known for her films co-directed with her husband, Aleksey Chupov. Her films The Man Who Surprised Everyone (2018) and Captain Volkonogov Escaped (2021) have been screened at the Venice International Film Festival.\n\nRadda Novikova is a film and television director. She is one of the most prolific Russian television comedy directors of the 21st century. She has directed many popular TV series including Girls with Makarov (2022), Interns (2013), Two Fathers, Two Sons (2011).\n\nElena Jordi was the first woman director of Spain. She directed Thaïs in 1918.\n\nPioneer filmmakers Josefina Molina , Helena Cortesina , Rosario Pi were among the first women film directors of Spain.\n\nMaría Forteza was the first woman director of a sound picture in 1934 with the short film documentary Mallorca .\n\nAna Mariscal was a prolific actress in the 1940s and 1950s. In the early 1950s she became a producer and shortly after started directing and writing her own films. Her best-known film is perhaps El camino (1963), an adaptation of the novel by Miguel Delibes . Other films include Segundo López, aventurero urbano (1953) inspired by Italian neorealism or Con la vida hicieron fuego (1959), about a former combatant of the Republican faction who tries to start a new life while battling the haunting memories of the Spanish Civil War .\n\nJosefina Molina , also a novelist, started her career in the 1960s. She was the first woman who graduated from Spain's National Film School in 1967. Her prolific TV résumé includes the highly successful miniseries Teresa de Jesús (1984), a dramatization of Teresa of Avila 's life. Her work on film includes Vera, un cuento cruel (1974), Función de noche (1981) or Esquilache (1989) which was entered into the 39th Berlin International Film Festival .\n\nPilar Miró was a celebrated director and screenwriter of film and TV whose notable works include Gary Cooper, Who Art in Heaven (1980), Prince of Shadows (1991) which won the Silver Bear for outstanding artistic contribution at the 42nd Berlin International Film Festival and El perro del hortelano (1996), an adaptation of a Lope de Vega play which won 7 Goya Awards including Best Picture and Best Director. She was also in charge of Spain's national broadcast television TVE from 1986 to 1989.\n\nIcíar Bollaín made her acting debut as a teenager under Víctor Erice 's direction in El sur (1983). She made the jump to directing and writing in 1995 with Hola, ¿estás sola? which earned her a nomination for a Goya Award for Best New Director . Her subsequent filmography includes Flores de otro mundo (1999) winner of the Grand Prix award at the International Critics' Week at the 1999 Cannes Film Festival , Te doy mis ojos (2003) which won her a Goya Award for Best Director and a nomination for a European Film Award for Best Director or Even the Rain (2010) which made the January shortlist for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film .\n\nIsabel Coixet directed numerous television commercials during the 1990s. She usually films in English with international actors. Some of her best known films include My Life Without Me (2003), starring Sarah Polley , Mark Ruffalo , Scott Speedman and Deborah Harry , The Secret Life of Words (2005) once again starring Polley as well as Tim Robbins and Julie Christie , a segment on the omnibus film Paris, je t'aime (2006) and the Philip Roth adaptation Elegy (2008) starring Ben Kingsley , Penélope Cruz , Dennis Hopper and Patricia Clarkson .\n\nGracia Querejeta has won acclaim for her ensemble dramas By My Side Again (1999), Héctor (2004) and Seven Billiard Tables (2007). She has also directed documentaries and TV episodes.\n\nOther notable filmmakers include María Ripoll ( Tortilla Soup , The Man with Rain in His Shoes ), Patricia Ferreira, Chus Gutiérrez, María Lidón aka Luna ( Stranded: Náufragos , Moscow Zero ), Rosa Vergés, Lydia Zimmermann , Laura Mañá , Carla Simón , Elena Martin and Neus Ballús .\n\nEbba Lindkvist is the first Swedish woman to direct a film. In 1910 she directed the short drama, Värmländingarna , which premièred in Sweden on 27 October 1910. Another Swedish film pioneer is Anna Hofman-Uddgren who directed Stockholmsfrestelser in 1911. Swedish actress Mai Zetterling directed a number of films in the 1960s and 1970s.\n\nA notable recent film made by a female Swedish film director, Pleasure (2021) by Ninja Thyberg, was screened at Sundance Film Festival.\n\nJoy Batchelor was an English animator, director, screenwriter, and producer. She married John Halas in 1940, and subsequently co-established Halas and Batchelor cartoons, whose best known production is the animated feature film Animal Farm (1954), which made her the first woman director of an animated feature since Lotte Reiniger .\n\nMuriel Box was an English screenwriter and director, directing her first film in 1941. She was active for two decades, until the 1960s. \n\nIn Britain Jane Arden (1927–82), following up her television drama The Logic Game (1965), wrote and starred in the film Separation ( Jack Bond 1967), which explores a woman's mental landscape during a marital breakup. Arden went on to be the only British woman to gain a solo feature-directing credit for The Other Side of the Underneath (1972), a disturbing study of female madness shot mainly in South Wales. Arden's overtly feminist work was neglected and almost lost until the British Film Institute rediscovered and reissued her three features, and the short Vibration (1974), in 2009.\n\nAndrea Arnold won a 2005 Academy Award for her short film Wasp , and has won the Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival three times; in 2006 for Red Road , in 2009 for Fish Tank and in 2016 for American Honey .\n\nTwo of Lynne Ramsay 's early short films ( Small Deaths and Gasman ) won the Prix du Jury at the Cannes Film Festival, and her subsequent four feature films, Ratcatcher (1999), Morvern Callar (2002), We Need to Talk About Kevin (2011), and You Were Never Really Here (2017) have all screened at the Cannes Festival.\n\nGeorgina Willis made her debut at Cannes with the independently produced controversial feminist film Watermark (2003). Watermark is about a woman who faces mental health issues and ends up killing her own child.\n\nMamma Mia! directed by Phyllida Lloyd became the #5 highest-grossing film of 2008 and the highest-grossing film ever in the United Kingdom. Lloyd's next film, the Margaret Thatcher biopic The Iron Lady (2012) grossed $114 million worldwide. Debbie Isitt has directed successful mainstream films, including \"Confetti\" and the \"Nativity!\" trilogy.\n\nCinenova is a London-based organization that distributes women produced films.\n\nSally Potter is a prominent British feminist film maker who made her breakthrough as director of Tilda Swinton starrer Orlando (1992). Her films regularly screen and win awards at major film festivals, including Venice Film Festival and Berlin Film Festival. Other notable films by Potter include The Party (2017), The Man Who Cried (2000) and Ginger & Rosa (2012).\n\nBritish filmmakers Ngozi Onwurah and Pratibha Parmar explore the legacies of colonialism. Film director Gurinder Chadha primarily makes films about women of Indian origin living in England.\n\nWork by British film director and writer Shamim Sarif often draws upon her own personal experience with cross cultural, non-heterosexual love. Some of her notable films include lesbian romantic drama I Can't Think Straight (2008) and Cold War espionage film Despite the Falling Snow (2016) starring Rebecca Ferguson .\n\nPartially as a result of funding from the UK Film Council (disbanded in 2010), a new generation of British female filmmakers has emerged in the 21st-century, including Penny Woolcock , Carol Morley , Joanna Hogg , Clio Barnard , Sally El Hosaini , Amma Asante , and Tina Gharavi . Gallery artists Gillian Wearing and Sam Taylor-Wood have both moved into feature cinema, with Taylor-Wood (now Taylor-Johnson) named as director of the adaptation of Fifty Shades of Grey . \n\nIncreased government funding for the film industry in Australia in the 1970s led to a renaissance in cinema, and, as part of the growing feminist movement in Australia at that time, women's cinema grew. The role of women's films was discussed at the Women's Liberation Conference in Melbourne in 1970, and groups such as the Feminist Film Workers collective (1970s and 1980s), Sydney Women\"s Film Group (SWFG, 1972–), Melbourne Women's Film Group (1973–), Reel Women (1979 to 1983 in Melbourne), and Women's Film Unit (Sydney and Melbourne, 1984/5) were established. A number of filmmakers, including Jeni Thornley , Sarah Gibson, Susan Lambert, Martha Ansara , Margot Nash and Megan McMurchy , were involved in these groups. The 1975 International Women's Film Festival , the first of its kind, was initiated by the SWFG, but groups around the country organised screening events in other state capitals. In Melbourne and Sydney the festivals ran for nine days (with an audience of around 56,000), and in the other states they spanned two to three days. \n\nGillian Armstrong is a notable Australian filmmaker, best known for her 1979 film My Brilliant Career . Other significant Australian film directors include Jocelyn Moorhouse ( The Dressmaker ), Catriona McKenzie , and Kitty Green . [ citation needed ] Jill Bilcock is a world-renowned editor , about whom two documentaries have been made. \n\nThe 2020 film Brazen Hussies , a feature documentary about second-wave feminism in Australia , written and directed by Catherine Dwyer , despite having great difficulty in getting it financed, proved highly successful \n\nJane Campion (born 1954) is the most well-known woman director from New Zealand. For her film The Piano (1993) she received the Palme d'Or at the 1993 Cannes Film Festival. In 2022 she received the Academy Award as Best Director for the film The Power of the Dog . [ citation needed ]\n\nPietra Brettkelly (born 1985) is known for her documentaries, which include Yellow is Forbidden and A Flickering Truth . [ citation needed ]",
  "An animator is an artist who creates images, known as frames, which give an illusion of movement called animation when displayed in rapid sequence. Animators can work in a variety of fields including film, television, and video games. Animation is closely related to filmmaking and like filmmaking is extremely labor-intensive, which means that most significant works require the collaboration of several animators. The methods of creating the images or frames for an animation piece depend on the animators' artistic styles and their field.\n\nOther artists who contribute to animated cartoons , but who are not animators, include layout artists (who design the backgrounds, lighting, and camera angles), storyboard artists (who draw panels of the action from the script), and background artists (who paint the \"scenery\"). Animated films share some film crew positions with regular live action films, such as director, producer, sound engineer, and editor, but differ radically in that for most of the history of animation, they did not need most of the crew positions seen on a physical set.\n\nIn hand-drawn Japanese animation productions, such as in Hayao Miyazaki 's films, the key animator handles both layout and key animation. Some animators in Japan such as Mitsuo Iso take full responsibility for their scenes, making them become more than just the key animator.\n\nAnimators often specialize. One important distinction is between character animators (artists who specialize in character movement, dialogue , acting, etc.) and special effects animators (who animate anything that is not a character; most commonly vehicles, machinery , and natural phenomena such as rain, snow, and water).\n\nStop motion animators do not draw their images, instead they move models or cut-outs frame-by-frame, famous animators of this genre being Ray Harryhausen and Nick Park .\n\nIn large-scale productions by major studios, each animator usually has one or more assistants, \" inbetweeners \" and \" clean-up artists\", who make drawings between the \"key poses\" drawn by the animator, and also re-draw any sketches that are too roughly made to be used as such. Usually, a young artist seeking to break into animation is hired for the first time in one of these categories, and can later advance to the rank of full animator (usually after working on several productions).\n\nHistorically, the creation of animation was a long and arduous process. Each frame of a given scene was hand-drawn, then transposed onto celluloid, where it would be traced and painted. These finished \"cels\" were then placed together in sequence over painted backgrounds and filmed, one frame at a time. \n\nAnimation methods have become far more varied in recent years. Today's cartoons could be created using any number of methods, mostly using computers to make the animation process cheaper and faster. These more efficient animation procedures have made the animator's job less tedious and more creative.\n\nAudiences generally find animation to be much more interesting with sound. Voice actors and musicians, among other talent, may contribute vocal or music tracks. Some early animated films asked the vocal and music talent to synchronize their recordings to already-extant animation (and this is still the case when films are dubbed for international audiences). For the majority of animated films today, the soundtrack is recorded first in the language of the film's primary target market and the animators are required to synchronize their work to the soundtrack. \n\nAs a result of the ongoing transition from traditional 2D to 3D computer animation , the animator's traditional task of redrawing and repainting the same character 24 times a second (for each second of finished animation) has now been superseded by the modern task of developing dozens (or hundreds) of movements of different parts of a character in a virtual scene.\n\nBecause of the transition to computer animation, many additional support positions have become essential, with the result that the animator has become but one component of a very long and highly specialized production pipeline. In the 21st century, visual development artists design a character as a 2D drawing or painting, then hand it off to modelers who build the character as a collection of digital polygons. Texture artists \"paint\" the character with colorful or complex textures, and technical directors set up rigging so that the character can be easily moved and posed. For each scene, layout artists set up virtual cameras and rough blocking . Finally, when a character's bugs have been worked out and its scenes have been blocked, it is handed off to an animator (that is, a person with that actual job title) who can start developing the exact movements of the character's virtual limbs, muscles, and facial expressions in each specific scene.\n\nAt that point, the role of the modern computer animator overlaps in some respects with that of his or her predecessors in traditional animation: namely, trying to create scenes already storyboarded in rough form by a team of story artists, and synchronizing lip or mouth movements to dialogue already prepared by a screenwriter and recorded by vocal talent. Despite those constraints, the animator is still capable of exercising significant artistic skill and discretion in developing the character's movements to accomplish the objective of each scene. There is an obvious analogy here between the art of animation and the art of acting, in that actors also must do the best they can with the lines they are given; it is often encapsulated by the common industry saying that animators are \"actors with pencils\". In 2015, Chris Buck noted in an interview that animators have become \"actors with mice .\" Some studios bring in acting coaches on feature films to help animators work through such issues. Once each scene is complete and has been perfected through the \" sweat box \" feedback process, the resulting data can be dispatched to a render farm , where computers handle the tedious task of actually rendering all the frames. Each finished film clip is then checked for quality and rushed to a film editor, who assembles the clips together to create the film.\n\nWhile early computer animation was heavily criticized for rendering human characters that looked plastic or even worse, eerie (see uncanny valley ), contemporary software can now render strikingly realistic clothing, hair, and skin. The solid shading of traditional animation has been replaced by very sophisticated virtual lighting in computer animation, and computer animation can take advantage of many camera techniques used in live-action filmmaking (i.e., simulating real-world \"camera shake\" through motion capture of a cameraman's movements). As a result, some studios now hire nearly as many lighting artists as animators for animated films, while costume designers, hairstylists, choreographers, and cinematographers have occasionally been called upon as consultants to computer-animated projects.",
  "Collage ( / k ə ˈ l ɑː ʒ / , from the French : coller , \"to glue\" or \"to stick together\" ) is a technique of art creation, primarily used in the visual arts , but in music too, by which art results from an assembly of different forms, thus creating a new whole. (Compare with pastiche , which is a \"pasting\" together.) Collage may refer to the technique as a whole, or more specifically to a two-dimensional work, assembled from flat pieces on a flat substrate, whereas assemblage typically refers to a three-dimensional equivalent. \n\nA collage may sometimes include magazine and newspaper clippings , ribbons , paint , bits of colored or handmade papers, portions of other artwork or texts, photographs and other found objects , glued to a piece of paper or canvas. The origins of collage can be traced back hundreds of years, but this technique made a dramatic reappearance in the early 20th century as an art form of novelty.\n\nThe term Papier collé was coined by both Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso in the beginning of the 20th century when collage became a distinctive part of modern art . \n\nTechniques of collage were first used at the time of the invention of paper in China , around 200 BC. The use of collage, however, did not arise until the 10th century in Japan , when calligraphers began to apply glued paper, using texts on surfaces, when writing their poems . Some surviving pieces in this style are found in the collection at the Nishi Hongan-ji temple, containing many volumes of the Sanju Rokunin Kashu anthologies of waka poems.\n\nThe technique of collage appeared in medieval Europe during the 13th century. Gold leaf panels started to be applied in Gothic cathedrals around the 15th and 16th centuries. Gemstones and other precious metals were applied to religious images, icons , and also, to coats of arms . An 18th-century example of collage art can be found in the work of Mary Delany . In the 19th century, collage methods also were used among hobbyists for memorabilia (e.g. applied to photo albums ) and books (e.g. Hans Christian Andersen , Carl Spitzweg ). Many institutions have attributed the beginnings of the practice of collage to Picasso and Braque in 1912, however, early Victorian photocollage suggest collage techniques were practiced in the early 1860s. Many institutions recognize these works as memorabilia for hobbyists, though they functioned as a facilitator of Victorian aristocratic collective portraiture, proof of female erudition, and presented a new mode of artistic representation that questioned the way in which photography is truthful. In 2009, curator Elizabeth Siegel organized the exhibition: Playing with Pictures at the Art Institute Chicago to acknowledge collage works by Alexandra of Denmark and Mary Georgina Filmer among others. The exhibition later traveled to The Metropolitan Museum of Art and The Art Gallery of Ontario .\n\nDespite the pre-twentieth-century use of collage-like application techniques, some art authorities argue that collage, properly speaking, did not emerge until after 1900, in conjunction with the early stages of modernism.\n\nFor example, the Tate Gallery 's online art glossary states that collage \"was first used as an artists' technique in the twentieth century\". According to the Guggenheim Museum 's online art glossary, collage is an artistic concept associated with the beginnings of modernism, and entails much more than the idea of gluing something onto something else. The glued-on patches which Braque and Picasso added to their canvases offered a new perspective on painting when the patches \"collided with the surface plane of the painting\". In this perspective, collage was part of a methodical reexamination of the relation between painting and sculpture, and these new works \"gave each medium some of the characteristics of the other\", according to the Guggenheim essay. Furthermore, these chopped-up bits of newspaper introduced fragments of externally referenced meaning into the collision: \"References to current events, such as the war in the Balkans, and to popular culture enriched the content of their art.\" This juxtaposition of signifiers, \"at once serious and tongue-in-cheek\", was fundamental to the inspiration behind collage: \"Emphasizing concept and process over end product, collage has brought the incongruous into meaningful congress with the ordinary.\" \n\nCollage in the modernist sense began with Cubist painters Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso . Snippets and fragments of different and unrelated subject matter made up Cubism collages, or papier collé , which gave them a deconstructed form and appearance. According to some sources, Picasso was the first to use the collage technique in oil paintings. According to the Guggenheim Museum 's online article about collage, Braque took up the concept of collage itself before Picasso, applying it to charcoal drawings. Picasso adopted collage immediately after (and could be the first to use collage in paintings, as opposed to drawings):\n\n\"It was Braque who purchased a roll of simulated oak-grain wallpaper and began cutting out pieces of the paper and attaching them to his charcoal drawings. Picasso immediately began to make his own experiments in the new medium.\" \n\nIn 1912 for his Still Life with Chair Caning , Picasso pasted a patch of oilcloth with a chair-cane design onto the canvas of the piece.\n\nSurrealist artists have made extensive use of collage and have swayed away from the still-life focus of Cubists. Rather, in keeping with surrealism, surrealist artists such as Joseph Cornell created collages consisting of fictional and strange, dream-like scenes. Cubomania is a collage made by cutting an image into squares which are then reassembled automatically or at random. Collages produced using a similar, or perhaps identical, method are called etrécissements by Marcel Mariën from a method first explored by Mariën. Surrealist games such as parallel collage use collective techniques of collage making.\n\nThe Sidney Janis Gallery held an early Pop Art exhibit called the New Realist Exhibition in November 1962, which included works by the American artists Tom Wesselmann , Jim Dine , Robert Indiana , Roy Lichtenstein , Claes Oldenburg , James Rosenquist , George Segal , and Andy Warhol ; and Europeans such as Arman , Baj, Christo , Yves Klein , Festa, Mimmo Rotella , Jean Tinguely , and Schifano. It followed the Nouveau Réalisme exhibition at the Galerie Rive Droite in Paris , and marked the international debut of the artists who soon gave rise to what came to be called Pop Art in Britain and The United States and Nouveau Réalisme on the European continent. Many of these artists used collage techniques in their work.\nWesselmann took part in the New Realist show with some reservations, exhibiting two 1962 works: Still life #17 and Still life #22 .\n\nAnother technique is that of canvas collage, which is the application, typically with glue, of separately painted canvas patches to the surface of a painting's main canvas. Well known for use of this technique is British artist John Walker in his paintings of the late 1970s, but canvas collage was already an integral part of the mixed media works of such American artists as Conrad Marca-Relli and Jane Frank by the early 1960s. The intensely self-critical Lee Krasner also frequently destroyed her own paintings by cutting them into pieces, only to create new works of art by reassembling the pieces into collages.\n\nThe wood collage is a type that emerged somewhat later than paper collage. Kurt Schwitters began experimenting with wood collages in the 1920s after already having given up painting for paper collages. The principle of wood collage is clearly established at least as early as his 'Merz Picture with Candle', dating from the mid to late 1920s.\n\nIn a sense, wood collage made its debut indirectly at the same time as paper collage, since according to the Guggenheim online, Georges Braque initiated use of paper collage by cutting out pieces of simulated oak-grain wallpaper and attaching them to his own charcoal drawings. Thus, the idea of gluing wood to a picture was implicit from the start, since the paper used was a commercial product manufactured to look like wood.\n\nIt was during a fifteen-year period of intense experimentation beginning in the mid-1940s that Louise Nevelson evolved her sculptural wood collages, assembled from found scraps, including parts of furniture , pieces of wooden crates or barrels, and architectural remnants like stair railings or moldings. Generally rectangular, very large, and painted black, they resemble gigantic paintings. Concerning Nevelson's Sky Cathedral (1958), the Museum of Modern Art catalogue states, \"As a rectangular plane to be viewed from the front, Sky Cathedral has the pictorial quality of a painting...\" Yet such pieces also present themselves as massive walls or monoliths, which can sometimes be viewed from either side, or even looked through .\n\nMuch wood collage art is considerably smaller in scale, framed and hung as a painting would be. It usually features pieces of wood, wood shavings, or scraps, assembled on a canvas (if there is painting involved), or on a wooden board. Such framed, picture-like, wood- relief collages offer the artist an opportunity to explore the qualities of depth, natural color, and textural variety inherent in the material, while drawing on and taking advantage of the language, conventions, and historical resonances that arise from the tradition of creating pictures to hang on walls. The technique of wood collage is also sometimes combined with painting and other media in a single work of art.\n\nFrequently, what is called \"wood collage art\" uses only natural wood - such as driftwood , or parts of found and unaltered logs, branches, sticks, or bark. This raises the question of whether such artwork is collage (in the original sense) at all (see Collage and modernism ). This is because the early, paper collages were generally made from bits of text or pictures - things originally made by people, and functioning or signifying in some cultural context. The collage brings these still-recognizable \" signifiers \" (or fragments of signifiers) together, in a kind of semiotic collision. A truncated wooden chair or staircase newel used in a Nevelson work can also be considered a potential element of collage in the same sense: it had some original, culturally determined context. Unaltered, natural wood, such as one might find on a forest floor, arguably has no such context; therefore, the characteristic contextual disruptions associated with the collage idea, as it originated with Braque and Picasso, cannot really take place. ( Driftwood is of course sometimes ambiguous: while a piece of driftwood may once have been a piece of worked wood - for example, part of a ship - it may be so weathered by salt and sea that its past functional identity is nearly or completely obscured.)\n\nDecoupage is a type of collage usually defined as a craft . It is the process of placing a picture into an object for decoration . Decoupage can involve adding multiple copies of the same image, cut and layered to add apparent depth. The picture is often coated with varnish or some other sealant for protection.\n\nIn the early part of the 20th century, decoupage, like many other art methods, began experimenting with a less realistic and more abstract style. 20th-century artists who produced decoupage works include Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse . The most famous decoupage work is Matisse's Blue Nude II .\n\nThere are many varieties on the traditional technique involving purpose made 'glue' requiring fewer layers (often 5 or 20, depending on the amount of paper involved). Cutouts are also applied under glass or raised to give a three-dimensional appearance according to the desire of the decouper . Currently decoupage is a popular handicraft .\n\nThe craft became known as découpage in France (from the verb découper , 'to cut out') as it attained great popularity during the 17th and 18th centuries. Many advanced techniques were developed during this time, and items could take up to a year to complete due to the many coats and sandings applied. Some famous or aristocratic practitioners included Marie Antoinette , Madame de Pompadour , and Beau Brummell . In fact the majority of decoupage enthusiasts attribute the beginning of decoupage to 17th century Venice . However it was known before this time in Asia.\n\nThe most likely origin of decoupage is thought to be East Siberian funerary art . Nomadic tribes would use cut out felts to decorate the tombs of their deceased. From Siberia, the practice came to China , and by the 12th century, cut out paper was being used to decorate lanterns, windows, boxes and other objects. In the 17th century, Italy , especially in Venice , was at the forefront of trade with the Far East and it is generally thought that it is through these trade links that the cut out paper decorations made their way into Europe.\n\nCollage made from photographs, or parts of photographs, is called photomontage. Photomontage is the process (and result) of making a composite photograph by cutting and joining a number of other photographs. The composite picture was sometimes photographed so that the final image is converted back into a seamless photographic print. The same method is accomplished today using image-editing software. The technique is referred to by professionals as compositing .\n\nJust what is it that makes today's homes so different, so appealing? was created in 1956 for the catalogue of the This Is Tomorrow exhibition in London , England in which it was reproduced in black and white. In addition, the piece was used in posters for the exhibit. Richard Hamilton has subsequently created several works in which he reworked the subject and composition of the pop art collage, including a 1992 version featuring a female bodybuilder. Many artists have created derivative works of Hamilton's collage. P. C. Helm made a year 2000 interpretation. \n\nOther methods for combining pictures are also called photomontage, such as Victorian \"combination printing\", the printing from more than one negative on a single piece of printing paper (e.g. O. G. Rejlander , 1857), front-projection and computer montage techniques. Much as a collage is composed of multiple facets, artists also combine montage techniques. Romare Bearden ’s (1912–1988) series of black and white \"photomontage projections\" is an example. His method began with compositions of paper, paint, and photographs put on boards 8½ × 11 inches. Bearden fixed the imagery with an emulsion that he then applied with hand roller. Subsequently, he enlarged the collages photographically.\n\nThe 19th-century tradition of physically joining multiple images into a composite and photographing the results prevailed in press photography and offset lithography until the widespread use of digital image editing . Contemporary photo editors in magazines now create \"paste-ups\" digitally.\n\nCreating a photomontage has, for the most part, become easier with the advent of computer software such as Adobe Photoshop , Pixel image editor, and GIMP . These programs make the changes digitally, allowing for faster workflow and more precise results. They also mitigate mistakes by allowing the artist to \"undo\" errors. Yet some artists are pushing the boundaries of digital image editing to create extremely time-intensive compositions that rival the demands of the traditional arts. The current trend is to create pictures that combine painting, theatre, illustration and graphics in a seamless photographic whole.\n\nDigital collage is the technique of using computer tools in collage creation to encourage chance associations of disparate visual elements and the subsequent transformation of the visual results through the use of electronic media . It is commonly used in the creation of digital art using programs such as Photoshop.\n\nA 3D collage is an art of putting altogether three-dimensional objects such as rocks, beads, buttons, coins, or even soil to form a new whole or a new object. Examples can include houses, bead circles, etc.\n\nThe term \"eCollage\" (electronic Collage) can be used for a collage created by using computer tools.\n\nThough Le Corbusier and other architects used techniques that are akin to collage, collage as a theoretical concept only became widely discussed after the publication of Collage City (1978) by Colin Rowe and Fred Koetter.\n\nRowe and Koetter were not, however, championing collage in the pictorial sense, much less seeking the types of disruptions of meaning that occur with collage. Instead, they were looking to challenge the uniformity of Modernism and saw collage with its non-linear notion of history as a means to reinvigorate design practice. Not only does historical urban fabric have its place, but in studying it, designers were, so it was hoped, able to get a sense of how better to operate. Rowe was a member of the so-called Texas Rangers , a group of architects who taught at the University of Texas for a while. Another member of that group was Bernhard Hoesli , a Swiss architect who went on to become an important educator at the ETH -Zurich. Whereas for Rowe, collage was more a metaphor than an actual practice, Hoesli actively made collages as part of his design process. He was close to Robert Slutzky, a New York-based artist, and frequently introduced the question of collage and disruption in his studio work.\n\nThe concept of collage has crossed the boundaries of visual arts. In music , with the advances on recording technology, avant-garde artists started experimenting with cutting and pasting since the middle of the twentieth century. In the 1960s, George Martin created collages of recordings while producing the records of The Beatles . In 1967 pop artist Peter Blake made the collage for the cover of the Beatles' seminal album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band . In the 1970s and 1980s, the likes of Christian Marclay and the group Negativland reappropriated old audio in new ways. By the 1990s and 2000s, with the popularity of the sampler , it became apparent that \" musical collages \" had become the norm for popular music , especially in rap , hip-hop and electronic music . In 1996, DJ Shadow released the groundbreaking album, Endtroducing..... , made entirely of preexisting recorded material mixed together in audible collage. In the same year, New York City-based artist, writer, and musician, Paul D. Miller aka DJ Spooky 's work pushed the work of sampling into a museum and gallery context as an art practice that combined DJ culture's obsession with archival materials as sound sources on his album Songs of a Dead Dreamer and in his books Rhythm Science [ usurped ] (2004) and Sound Unbound (2008) (MIT Press). In his books, \"mash-up\" and collage based mixes of authors, artists, and musicians such as Antonin Artaud , James Joyce , William S. Burroughs , and Raymond Scott were featured as part of a what he called \"literature of sound.\" In 2000, The Avalanches released Since I Left You , a musical collage consisting of approximately 3,500 musical sources (i.e., samples). \n\nCollage is commonly used as a technique in children's picture book illustration . Eric Carle is a prominent example, using vividly colored hand-textured papers cut to shape and layered together, sometimes embellished with crayon or other marks. See image at The Very Hungry Caterpillar .\n\nCollage is sometimes used alone or in combination with other techniques in artists' books , especially in one-off unique books rather than as reproduced images in published books. \n\nCollage novels are books with images selected from other publications and collaged together following a theme or narrative.\n\nThe bible of discordianism , the Principia Discordia , is described by its author as a literary collage. A collage in literary terms may also refer to a layering of ideas or images.\n\nCollage is utilized in fashion design in the sketching process, as part of mixed media illustrations, where drawings together with diverse materials such as paper, photographs, yarns or fabric bring ideas into designs.\n\nCollage film is traditionally defined as, “A film that juxtaposes fictional scenes with footage taken from disparate sources, such as newsreels.” Combining different types of footage can have various implications depending on the director's approach. Collage film can also refer to the physical collaging of materials onto filmstrips. Canadian filmmaker Arthur Lipsett was especially renowned for his collage films, many of which were made from the cutting room floors of the National Film Board studios.\n\nThe use of CGI , or computer-generated imagery , can be considered a form of collage, especially when animated graphics are layered over traditional film footage. At certain moments during Amélie (Jean-Pierre Juenet, 2001), the mise en scène takes on a highly fantasized style, including fictitious elements like swirling tunnels of color and light. David O. Russell's I Heart Huckabees (2004) incorporates CGI effects to visually demonstrate philosophical theories explained by the existential detectives (played by Lily Tomlin and Dustin Hoffman ). In this case, the effects serve to enhance clarity, while adding a surreal aspect to an otherwise realistic film.\n\nWhen collage uses existing works, the result is what some copyright scholars call a derivative work . The collage thus has a copyright separate from any copyrights pertaining to the original incorporated works.\n\nDue to redefined and reinterpreted copyright laws, and increased financial interests, some forms of collage art are significantly restricted. For example, in the area of sound collage (such as hip hop music ), some court rulings effectively have eliminated the de minimis doctrine as a defense to copyright infringement , thus shifting collage practice away from non-permissive uses relying on fair use or de minimis protections, and toward licensing . Examples of musical collage art that have run afoul of modern copyright are The Grey Album and Negativland 's U2 .\n\nThe copyright status of visual works is less troubled, although still ambiguous. For instance, some visual collage artists have argued that the first-sale doctrine protects their work. The first-sale doctrine prevents copyright holders from controlling consumptive uses after the \"first sale\" of their work, although the Ninth Circuit has held that the first-sale doctrine does not apply to derivative works . The de minimis doctrine and the fair use exception also provide important defenses against claimed copyright infringement. The Second Circuit in October, 2006, held that artist Jeff Koons was not liable for copyright infringement because his incorporation of a photograph into a collage painting was fair use. ",
  "Bouillabaisse ( / ˌ b uː j ə ˈ b ɛ s / BOO -yə- BESS , US also /- ˈ b eɪ s / -⁠ BAYSS , French: [bujabɛ(ː)s] ⓘ ; Provençal : bolhabaissa [ˌbuʎaˈβajsɔ, ˌbujaˈbajsɔ] ) is a traditional Provençal fish soup originating in the port city of Marseille . The word is originally a compound of the two Provençal verbs bolhir ('to boil ') and abaissar ('to reduce heat', i.e. ' simmer ').\n\nBouillabaisse was originally a dish made by Marseille fishermen, using bony rockfish , which they were unable to sell to restaurants or markets. There are at least three kinds of fish in a traditional bouillabaisse: typically red rascasse ( Scorpaena scrofa ); sea robin ; and European conger . It can also include gilt-head bream , turbot , monkfish , mullet , or European hake . It usually also includes shellfish and other seafood such as sea urchins , mussels , velvet crabs , spider crabs , or octopus . More expensive versions may add langoustine ( Dublin Bay prawn ; Norway lobster), though this was not part of the traditional dish made by Marseille fishermen. Vegetables such as leeks , onions , tomatoes , celery , and potatoes are simmered together with the broth and served with the fish. The broth is traditionally served with rouille , a mayonnaise made of olive oil , garlic , saffron , and cayenne pepper , on grilled slices of bread.\n\nWhat makes a bouillabaisse different from other fish soups is the selection of Provençal herbs and spices in the broth; the use of bony local Mediterranean fish; the way the fish are added one at a time, and brought to a boil; and the method of serving. In Marseille, the broth is served first in a soup plate with slices of bread and rouille , then the fish is served separately on a large platter (see image at top); or, more simply, as Julia Child suggests, the fish and broth are brought to the table separately and served together in large soup plates. \n\nRecipes for bouillabaisse vary from family to family in Marseille, and local restaurants dispute which versions are the most authentic.\n\nIn 1980, 11 Marseille restaurateurs collaborated to draw up the Bouillabaisse Charter which codified both ingredients and method of preparation. An authentic Marseille bouillabaisse must include rascasse ( Scorpaena scrofa ), a bony rockfish which lives in the calanque and reefs close to shore. It usually also has congre (eng: European conger ) and grondin (eng: sea robin ). According to the Michelin Guide Vert , the four essential elements of a true bouillabaisse are the presence of rascasse, the freshness of the fish; olive oil, and excellent saffron. \n\nThe American chef and food writer Julia Child , who lived in Marseille for a year, wrote: \"to me the telling flavor of bouillabaisse comes from two things: the Provençal soup base—garlic, onions, tomatoes, olive oil, fennel, saffron, thyme, bay, and usually a bit of dried orange peel—and, of course, the fish—lean (non-oily), firm-fleshed, soft-fleshed, gelatinous, and shellfish.\" Other foreign residents in France have written about bouillabaisse. Stephen Lister , a British expatriate in Provence, wrote, \"When eaten where it is made commercially it is a lethal dish ... even when the stuff is made honestly ... the ingredients are not of much importance, because all you are going to taste anyway is garlic, saffron and something unidentifiable which always reminds me of chlorinated drains\". Elizabeth David was less censorious, but by no means laudatory:\n\nThe ingredients of a traditional Marseille bouillabaisse vary depending upon what fish are available that day and the taste of the chef. These are the typical ingredients used in one of the most traditional Marseille restaurants, the Grand Bar des Goudes on Rue Désirée-Pelleprat: \n\nFour kilograms of fish and shellfish, including, on a typical day, grondin ( sea robin ), Rascasse ( Scorpaena scrofa ), rouget grondin ( red gurnard ), congre ( conger eel ), baudroie (lotte, or monkfish ), Saint-Pierre ( John Dory ), vive ( weever ), and sea urchins . Other ingredients in the broth include a kilogram of potatoes, seven cloves of garlic , onions, ripe tomatoes, and a cup of olive oil. The broth is seasoned with a bouquet garni , fennel, eight pistils of saffron , salt and Cayenne pepper .\n\nThe rouille , a spicy mayonnaise which is spread on thick slices of country bread and floated on the bouillabaisse when served, is made with an egg yolk, two cloves of garlic, a cup of olive oil, and ten pistils of saffron, and is seasoned with salt and Cayenne pepper.\n\nIn the traditional bouillabaisse served in Marseille restaurants, the bouillon is served first, very hot, with the rouille spread on thick slices of bread rubbed with garlic. The fish and potatoes are served next on a separate platter. \n\nIn another version, in the Petit Larousse de la Cuisine , the broth is served over bread with the rouille on top, and the fish and crabs are served on a large platter. \n\nOther variations add different seasonings, such as orange peel, and sometimes a cup of white wine or cognac is added. \n\nThe French screenwriter and playwright Marcel Pagnol , a member of the Académie française and a native of Marseille, showed his own idea of a proper bouillabaisse in two of his films. In Cigalon [ fr ] (1935), the chef Cigalon serves a bouillabaisse provençale aux poissons de roche , (Bouillabaisse of Provence with rockfish) made with a kilogram of local fish; Scorpaena scrofa ( rascasse ); capelin ; angler fish ( baudroie ); John Dory ( Saint-Pierre ); and slipper lobster ( cigale de mer ). \"When I put these fish into the pan,\" Cigalon says, \"they were still wiggling their tails.\" Cigalon specifies that the slices of bread served with the broth should be thick and not toasted, and that the rouille \"should not have too much pepper.\" \n\nIn the 1936 film César , Pagnol's hero Marius reveals the secret of the bouillabaisse of a small bistro near the port in Marseille. \"Everybody knows it,\" Marius says: \"they perfume the broth with a cream of sea urchins.\" \n\nThe Phoceans who founded Marseille in 600 BC, ate a simple fish broth known in Ancient Greek as \" kakavia \". Another fish soup also appears in Roman mythology : it is the dish that Venus fed to Vulcan . They were different from the boullabaisse as they did not include saffron and rouille . \n\nGenerally fish soups are found in France ( bourride , chaudrée), Greece, Italy ( zuppa di pesce ), Portugal ( caldeirada ), Spain ( sopa de pescado y marisco , Catalonia ( suquet de peix [ es ] ), and all the countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea . What makes a bouillabaisse different from these other dishes are the local Provençal herbs and spices, the particular selection of bony Mediterranean coastal fish , and the way the broth is served separately from the fish and vegetables. ",
  "Goliath Artists is an American management company and record label founded by Shady Records president and co-founder Paul Rosenberg , based in New York City, New York and Detroit, Michigan .\n\nOn February 21, 2020 it was reported that Paul Rosenberg was stepping down from Def Jam Recordings as Chairman and CEO to focus his time operating Shady Records, Goliath Artists, and his new venture Goliath Records. The following year, he announced his first signee on the Goliath Records roster, Indiana rapper Vince Ash and released his deluxe version of VITO through Interscope . \n\nThis article about a music industry company is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Glückauf (alternative spelling Glück auf ; also, as an exclamation: Glück auf! ) is the traditional German miners' greeting. It describes the hope of the miners : \"es mögen sich Erzgänge auftun\" (\"may lodes [of ore] be opened\") which is short for \"Ich wünsche Dir Glück, tu einen neuen Gang auf\" (\"I wish you luck, open a new lode\"), because, when mining for ore, without prospecting, no-one could predict with certainty whether the miners' work would lead to a reward. The greeting also expressed the desire that miners would return safely from the mine after their shift.\n\nToday it is still a common form of greeting in the Ore Mountains region of eastern Germany and in the Ruhr area, specifically Bochum, which is home to the German Mining Museum ( Deutsches Bergbau-Museum ).\n\nThe greeting emerged in the Saxon Ore Mountains towards the end of the 16th century, when the miners still entered and left the mines on foot using ladders ( Fahrten ) or man engines ( Fahrkunst ). That meant that, after a typical 10-hour shift, the miner often had a challenging and dangerous 2 hours of climbing ahead of him, something that they believed needed a degree of luck to negotiate safely. If he slipped ( fahrtlos ), he fell down the shaft. The result was that at that time (16th to 18th centuries) fatal accidents were very common, and not just when entering or leaving the mine. It was often the case that friends on the next shift, who had been greeted on the way out, were left in the mine.\n\nThe miner's greeting was already being used before 1700, being artistically employed in the old miner's song Glück Auf, der Steiger kommt ; it thus became part of the folksong repertoire.\n\nMines were also named after the greeting, such as the Zeche Glückauf-Tiefbau , Zeche Glückauf Barmen or Zeche Glückaufsegen .\n\nBy 1890 at the latest the greeting was widespread among German-speaking speleologists (cave explorers) and is still the most common form of greeting in that community today. It is particularly commonly used when entering the cave. \n\nWith the emergence of student culture in the 1800's student associations linked to mining related fields of study incorporated the 'Glück Auf' greeting as part of their identity. Most notable would be the 'Mijnbouwkundige vereeniging' from the Delft University of Technology .",
  "A message in a bottle (abbrev. MIB ) is a form of communication in which a message is sealed in a container (typically a bottle) and released into a conveyance medium (typically a body of water).\n\nMessages in bottles have been used to send distress messages; in crowdsourced scientific studies of ocean currents; as memorial tributes; to send deceased loved ones' ashes on a final journey; to convey expedition reports; and to carry letters or reports from those believing themselves to be doomed. Invitations to prospective pen pals and letters to actual or imagined love interests have also been sent as messages in bottles.\n\nThe lore surrounding messages in bottles has often been of a romantic or poetic nature.\n\nUse of the term \"message in a bottle\" has expanded to include metaphorical uses or uses beyond its traditional meaning as bottled messages released into oceans. The term has been applied to plaques on craft launched into outer space , interstellar radio messages , stationary time capsules , balloon mail , and containers storing medical information for use by emergency medical personnel.\n\nWith a growing awareness that bottles constitute waste that can harm the environment and marine life, environmentalists tend to favor biodegradable drift cards and wooden blocks. \n\nBottled messages may date to about 310 BC, in water current studies reputed to have been carried out by Greek philosopher Theophrastus . The Japanese medieval epic The Tale of the Heike records the story of an exiled poet who, in about 1177 AD, launched wooden planks on which he had inscribed poems describing his plight. In the sixteenth century, Queen Elizabeth I reputedly created an official position of \"Uncorker of Ocean Bottles\", and—thinking some bottles might contain secrets from British spies or fleets—decreed that anyone else opening the bottles could face the death penalty . (However, it has been argued that this is a myth .) In the nineteenth century, literary works such as Edgar Allan Poe 's 1833 \" MS. Found in a Bottle \" and Charles Dickens ' 1860 \" A Message from the Sea \" inspired an enduring popular passion for sending bottled messages. \n\nScientific experiments involving drift objects—more generally called determinate drifters —provide information about currents and help researchers develop ocean circulation maps. For example, experiments conducted in the mid-1700s by Benjamin Franklin and others indicated the existence and approximate location of the Gulf Stream , with scientific confirmation following in the mid-1800s. Using a network of beachcomber informants, rear admiral Alexander Becher is believed to be the first (from 1808–1852) to study travel of so-called \"bottle papers\" around an ocean gyre (a large circulating current system). In the late 1800s, Albert I, Prince of Monaco determined that the Gulf Stream branched into the North Atlantic Drift and the Azores Current . In the 1890s, Scottish scientist T. Wemyss Fulton released floating bottles and wooden slips to chart North Sea surface currents for the first time. Releasing bottles designed to remain a short distance above the sea bed, British marine biologist George Parker Bidder III first proved in the early twentieth century that deep sea currents flowed from east to west in the North Sea and that bottom feeders prefer to move against the current. \n\nThe United States Coast and Geodetic Survey (USC&GS) used drift bottles from 1846 to 1966. More recently, technologies involving satellite tags, fixed current profilers and satellite communication have permitted more efficient analysis of ocean currents: at any given time, thousands of modern \" drifters \" transmit current position, temperature, velocity, etc., to satellites, thus avoiding conventional drift bottles' dependence on serendipitous finds and cooperation by conscientious citizens. \n\nDrift bottle studies have provided a simple way to learn about non-tidal movement of waters containing eggs and larvae of commercially important fishes, for sharing among fisheries scientists and oceanographers. Such experiments simulate the travel of pollutants such as oil spills, study formation of ocean gyre garbage patches such as the Great Pacific Garbage Patch , and suggest travel paths of invasive species . Persistent currents are detected to allow ships to ride favorable currents and avoid opposing currents. Projected travel paths of navigation hazards, such as naval mines , advise safer shipping routes. Even in inland waterways, drifters wirelessly deliver real-time data on water quality, GPS location, and water velocity, for early warning against flash floods, measuring pollution run-off, and monitoring algal blooms. \n\nOutside science, people have launched bottled messages to find pen pals , \"bottle preachers\" have sent \"sermon bottles\", propaganda -bearing bottles have been directed at foreign shores, and survivors have sent poetic loving tributes to departed loved ones or sent their cremated remains (ashes) on a final journey. \n\nIt was estimated in 2009 that since the mid-1900s, six million bottled messages had been released, including 500,000 from oceanographers. \n\nSome bottles are ballasted with dry sand so that they float vertically at or near the ocean surface, and are less influenced by winds and breaking waves than other bottles that are purposely not ballasted. Wooden blocks float higher in the water and thus are more influenced by wind—a design specially suited for simulating travel paths of plastic waste that is less dense than glass containers. \n\nAn early-20th-century \"bottom\" (or seabed ) drift bottle design by George Parker Bidder III involved weighting a bottle with a long copper wire that causes it to sink until the wire trails upon the sea bottom, at which time the bottle tends to remain a few inches above the bottom to be moved by the bottom current. A mushroom-shaped seabed drifter design has also been used. Seabed drifters are designed to be scooped up by a trawler or wash up on shore. \n\nWater pressure pressing on the cork or other closure was thought to keep a bottle better sealed; some designs included a wooden stick to stop the cork from imploding. Vessels of less scientific designs have survived for extended periods, including a baby food bottle a ginger beer bottle, and a 7-Up bottle. \n\nA low percentage of bottles—thought by some to be less than 3 percent—are actually recovered, so they are released in large numbers, sometimes in the thousands. Reported recovery rates for large-scale scientific studies vary based on the ocean of release, and range from 11 percent ( Woods Hole , 156,276 bottles from 1948 to 1962, Atlantic), to 10 percent (Woods Hole, 165,566 bottles from 1960 to 1970, Atlantic), to 3.4 percent ( Scripps Institution , 148,384 bottles from 1954 to 1971, Pacific). Oceanographic drift card recovery rates have ranged from 50 percent if released in densely populated areas ( North Sea , Puget Sound ) to 1 percent in uninhabited areas ( Antarctica ). Recovery rates decrease as bottles are released further from shore, with oceanographer Curtis Ebbesmeyer developing a rule of thumb that bottles released more than 160 kilometres (100 miles) from shore have recovery rates below 10 percent, and \"only a few percent\" of those released more than 1,600 kilometres (1,000 miles) from shore are recovered. About 90 percent of marine debris washes up on less than 10 percent of the world's coastlines, favoring beaches perpendicular to the dominant ocean current. Objects with similar buoyancy characteristics tend to collect together. \n\nA Scripps scientist said that marine organisms grow on the bottles, causing them to sink within eight to ten months unless washed ashore earlier. An unknown number are found but not reported. \n\nSome drift bottles were not found for more than a century after being launched. \n\nDrift bottles and seabed drifters provide only a birth notice and an obituary – with no biography.\n\nFloating objects may ride gyres (large circulating current systems) that are present in each ocean, and may be transferred from one ocean's gyre to another's. Further, objects may be sidetracked by wind, storms, countercurrents, and ocean current variation. Accordingly, drift bottles have traveled large distances, with drifts of 6,500–9,700 kilometres (4,000–6,000 miles) and more—sometimes traveling 160 kilometres (100 miles) per day—not uncommon. Bottles have traveled from the Beaufort Sea above northern Alaska and northwestern Canada to northern Europe; from Antarctica to Tasmania; from Mexico to the Philippines; from Canada's Labrador Sea and Baffin Bay to Irish, French, Scottish, and Norwegian beaches; from the Galapagos Islands to Australia; and from New Zealand to Spain (practically antipodes ). Based on empirical data collected since 1901, a computer program called OSCURS (Ocean Surface Current Simulator) digitally simulates motion and timing of floating objects in and between ocean gyres. \n\nDespite being launched substantial time periods before being found, some bottles have been found physically close to their original launch points, such as a message launched by two girls in 1915 and found in 2012 near Harsens Island , Michigan, U.S., and a ten-year-old girl's message launched into the Indian River Bay in Delaware, U.S. in 1971 and found in adjacent Delaware Seashore State Park in 2016. \n\nHistorical examples are listed in chronological order, based on year of recovery (when applicable):\n\nThe notion of the message in a bottle has come to attain a kind of romanticism, built perhaps on the allure of the exotic mystery its contents might reveal from a faraway place or a long-ago time.\n\nTable listing long-duration (>25-year) events involving messages in bottles (scroll):\n\nSeems I'm not alone at being alone—\n\nBesides interest in citizen science drift-bottle experiments, message-in-a-bottle lore has often been of a romantic or poetic nature. Such messages have been romanticized in literature, from Edgar Allan Poe 's 1833 story \" MS. Found in a Bottle \" through Nicholas Sparks ' 1998 Message in a Bottle . Clint Buffington, subject of the 2019 documentary short film The Tides That Bind / A Message in a Bottle Story, surmised in an interview with The Guardian that sending a bottled message expresses a hope to find connection in a fear-filled world. In Newsweek Ryan Bort recounted various historical messages as being cries for help, or \"final, poetic words of resignation left behind for (an) indifferent sea\", or from \"lonely, lovelorn souls, searching for serendipity\", or a search for \"affirmation ... that comes from somewhere other than yourself\". Bort described sending a message in a bottle as a romantic act that has \"such a delicious potential for magic\" or as \"surrendering a part of yourself to something larger\", concluding that \"every message in a bottle is a prayer\". \n\nFinding a bottled message has generally been viewed positively, the finder of a 98-year-old message referring to his find as winning the lottery. However, intense media attention over a personal relationship that resulted from one woman's find, is said to have caused her to remark that had she known what would happen, she would have left the bottle on the beach. Another woman said she initially felt shocked and violated by publication of the personal suffering she had expressed in a bottled letter that she never expected would be found or read. \n\nThe term \"message in a bottle\" has been applied to techniques of communication that do not literally involve a bottle or a water-based method of conveyance, such as the Europa Clipper plaque (2024), the Pioneer plaque (1972, 1973), the Voyager Golden Record (1977), and even radio-borne messages (see Cosmic Call , Teen Age Message , A Message from Earth ), all directed into space. \n\nBalloon mail involves sending undirected messages through the air rather than into bodies of water. For example, during the Prussian Siege of Paris (1870–1871) about 2.5 million letters were sent by hot air balloon, the only way Parisians' letters could reach the rest of France. \n\nStationary time capsules have been termed \"messages in a bottle\", such as a 1935 message in a lemonade bottle correctly portending difficult times, which was found in 2016 by masons restoring damaged Portland stone at Southampton Guildhall . A geologist left a bottled message in 1959 in a cairn on isolated Ward Hunt Island (Canada, 83°N latitude), allowing its finders in 2013 to determine that a nearby glacier had retreated over 60 metres (200 ft) in the intervening 54 years. More durable examples of time capsules are the Westinghouse Time Capsules of the 1939 and 1964 New York World's Fairs , intended to be opened 5,000 years after their creation. \n\nPrisoners from the Auschwitz concentration camp concealed bottles containing sketches and writings that were found after World War II.\n\nCertain emergency medical services urge patients to record information describing their medical conditions, medications and drug allergies, emergency contacts, as well as advance healthcare directives for when the patients are incapacitated or suffer from dementia or learning difficulties, and place the record as a special \"message in a bottle\" stored in (conventionally) a refrigerator, where paramedics can quickly locate it. \n\nPlastic bottles are known to constitute plastic marine pollution, and eventually break down into smaller pieces because of ultraviolet light, salt degradation or wave action. Glass bottles can break into sharp-edged pieces, and bottle caps are ingested by sea birds. \n\nSome agencies continue to use drift bottles into the 21st century, but with increased awareness that man-made floating items can harm marine life or constitute waste material, biodegradable drift cards and biodegradable wooden drifters with non-toxic ink are gaining favor.",
  "International Rome Film Fest is a film festival that takes place in Rome during the month of October. The name in Italian is Festa del Cinema di Roma . From 2022, the festival was officially recognized as a competitive festival by the International Federation of Film Producers Associations . The 17th edition of the festival, from which it became competitive festival, took place from 13 to 23 October 2022. Whereas the 18th edition of the festival took place from 18 to 29 October 2023. \n\nThe 19th edition of the festival took place from 16 to 27 October 2024 in the Auditorium Parco della Musica . \n\nThe Rome Film Festival official program is divided into several sections:\n\nA selection of feature films, with priority given to world premieres. At the end of each screening, the audience votes for the People's Choice Award | Cinema d'Oggi.\n\nFeature films that are world premieres, international or European premieres.\n\nFeature films from various genres that are world, international or European premieres, with priority given to world premieres.\n\nWorld premieres highlighting new trends in Italian cinema. At the end of each screening, the audience votes for the People's Choice Award | Cinema Italia (Fiction) and the People's Choice Award | Cinema Italia (Documentary).\n\nDevoted to children films, this sections has two competitive subsections, one for over-12 films and the other under-12.\n\nThe Rome Film Festival award is a silver statuette shaped after the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius statue, placed in Michelangelo 's Campidoglio Square .\n\nThe winning film's prize money is given to its Italian distributor, or, if no Italian distributor buys it within six months, to its international seller.\n\nThe Rome Film Festival is produced by the Cinema per Roma Foundation, whose president is Laura Delli Colli . The General Manager is Francesca Via.\n\nThe Artistic Director of the Festival is Antonio Monda.",
  "Vauxhall Motors Limited [ note 2 ] is a British car company headquartered in Chalton , Bedfordshire , England. Vauxhall became a subsidiary of PSA Group in 2017, and later, its successor Stellantis in January 2021, having previously been owned by General Motors since 1925.\n\nVauxhall is one of the oldest established vehicle manufacturers and distribution companies in the United Kingdom. It sells passenger cars, and electric and light commercial vehicles under the Vauxhall marque nationally, and used to sell vans, buses, and trucks under the Bedford brand. \n\nVauxhall was founded by Alexander Wilson in 1857 as a pump and marine engine manufacturer. It was purchased by Andrew Betts Brown in 1863, who began producing travelling cranes under the company, renaming it \"Vauxhall Iron Works\". The company began manufacturing cars in 1903, and changed its name back around this time. It was acquired by American automaker General Motors (GM) in 1925. Bedford Vehicles was established as a subsidiary of Vauxhall in 1930 to manufacture commercial vehicles.\n\nIt was a luxury car brand until it was bought by General Motors, who thereafter built mid-market offerings. As Opel-made vehicles, they branded under Vauxhall often. From the time of the Great Depression , Vauxhall became increasingly mass-market. Since 1980, Vauxhall products have been largely identical to those of Opel , and most models are principally engineered in Rüsselsheim am Main , Germany. During the early 1980s, the Vauxhall brand was withdrawn from sale in all countries apart from the UK. At various times during its history, Vauxhall has been active in motorsports, including rallying and the British Touring Car Championship . After 92 years under GM's ownership, Opel /Vauxhall was sold to Groupe PSA in 2017. \n\nVauxhall has major manufacturing facilities in Luton (commercial vehicles, IBC Vehicles ) and Ellesmere Port (passenger cars). The Luton plant employs around 1,100 staff as of 2024 and has a capacity for building around 100,000 units a year. In 2012, the Ellesmere Port plant employed around 1,880 staff and had a theoretical (three-shift) capacity around 187,000 units a year. Vauxhall-branded vehicles are also manufactured in Opel factories in Germany, Spain , and Poland .\n\nThe current car range includes the Astra ( small family car ), Corsa ( supermini ), Frontera ( subcompact crossover SUV ), Mokka ( subcompact SUV ), and Grandland ( compact SUV ). Vauxhall sells high-performance versions of some of its models under the GSe sub-brand. Significant former Vauxhall production cars include the Victor , Viva , Chevette , and Cavalier .\n\nVauxhall is set to close its Luton plant in the future due to government incentives for plug-in electric vehicles adversely affecting ICE vehicle sales, despite the plant readying a 2025 transition to a new all-electric Vauxhall Vivaro 3 line. \n\nScottish marine engineer Alexander Wilson founded the company at 90–92 Wandsworth Road, Vauxhall , London, in 1857. It was founded as Alex Wilson and Company, and from 1857, the company built pumps and marine engines. In 1903 the company built its first car, a five-horsepower single-cylinder model steered using a tiller , with two forward gears and no reverse gear. About 70 were made in the first year, before the car was improved with wheel steering and a reverse gear in 1904. A single survivor could still be seen at the London Science Museum in 1968. A 1903 model was entered in the London-to-Brighton car run in 2018. \n\nTo expand, the company moved the majority of its production to Luton in 1905. The company continued to trade under the name Vauxhall Iron Works until 1907, when the modern name 'Vauxhall Motors' was adopted. The company was characterised by its sporting models, but after World War I , the company's designs were more austere.\n\nMuch of Vauxhall's success during the early years of Vauxhall Motors was attributable to Laurence Pomeroy . He joined Vauxhall in 1906 at the age of 22, as an assistant draughtsman. In the winter of 1907/8, the chief designer F. W. Hodges took a long holiday, and in his absence, the managing director Percy Kidner asked Pomeroy to design an engine for cars to be entered in the 1908 RAC and Scottish Reliability Trial, held in June that year. The cars were so successful that Pomeroy took over from Hodges. \n\nPomeroy's first design, the Y-Type Y1, had outstanding success at the 1908 RAC and Scottish 2000 Mile Reliability Trials – showing excellent hill-climbing ability with an aggregate of 37 seconds less time in the hill climbs than any other car in its class. With unparalleled speeds around the Brooklands circuit, the Vauxhall was so far ahead of all other cars of any class that the driver could relax, accomplishing the 200 miles (320 km) at an average speed of 46 mph (74 km/h), when the car was capable of 55 mph (89 km/h). The Y-Type went on to win class E of the trial.\n\nThe Y-Type was so successful that it was decided to put the car into production as the A09 car. This spawned the Vauxhall A-Type . Four distinct types of this were produced between 27 October 1908 and when mass production halted in 1914. One last A-Type was put together in 1920. Capable of up to 100 mph (160 km/h), the A-Type Vauxhall was one of the most acclaimed three-litre cars of its day.\n\nTwo cars were entered in the 1910 Prince Henry Trials, and although not outright winners, performed well, and replicas were made for sale officially as the C-type, but now known as the Prince Henry . During the First World War, Vauxhall made large numbers of the D-type, a Prince Henry chassis with derated engine, for use as staff cars for the British forces.\n\nAfter the 1918 armistice, the D-type remained in production, along with the sporting E-type . Pomeroy left in 1919, moving to the United States, and was replaced by C.E. King. Although Vauxhall made good cars, expensive pedigree cars of the kind that had served the company well in the prosperous prewar years were no longer in demand; the company struggled to make a consistent profit and Vauxhall looked for a major strategic partner.\n\nOn 16 November 1925, Vauxhall was acquired by General Motors for US$2.5 million. At the time, the purchase was not popular among senior U.S. GM executives. : 34 Vauxhall was only making seventeen cars per week and was in a financial mess. : 37 The company's image and target market were gently but firmly changed over the next five and more years, marked particularly by the introduction in late 1930 of the low-cost two-litre Vauxhall Cadet and the next year the first Bedford truck, which was Chevrolet based. Vauxhall's chief engineer since 1920, Charles Evelyn King, retired as engineering director in 1950. The company's future chief engineer, Harold Drew, left Luton for a spell, working as a draughtsman with GM's Lansing -based Oldsmobile division. As the first significant post-acquisition passenger car, the Cadet, initially retailing at £280, is generally regarded as demonstrating Vauxhall's newly acquired interest and expertise in controlling production costs, but it was also the first British car to feature a synchromesh gearbox . \n\nGeneral Motors continued to reposition Vauxhall towards the middle of the British car market. They aimed to produce higher volumes of more conventional cars that, using GM's large engineering, design and production resources, would offer modern technology and high levels of equipment at a reasonable price, with competitors being the likes of Wolseley and Humber. The Cadet had been the first step in this process, which gathered pace in June 1933 with the launch of the AS-type Light Six . With an all-steel body and a refined and modern overhead valve inline-six engine, the Light Six was produced in 12- and 14- 'tax horsepower' variants. Modernisation and expansion of the Luton factory meant that the Light Six was sold for £195 for the standard four-door saloon, which was significantly less than many of its older rivals with four-cylinder engines and less interior appointments, and Vauxhall made the unusual decision to offer both 12 and 14 models for the same price. Two-door saloon, coupe, tourer and cabriolet bodies were also available for extra cost, plus a range of other body designs from coachbuilders . The Light Six was an immediate sale success, surpassing all previous Vauxhall products by a large margin with 26,000 examples being sold in just over 12 months and with the Luton factory moving onto 24-hour shift work to meet demand. Vauxhall had suddenly become a significant player in the British car market.\n\nAfter 15 months on sale the AS-type Light Six was replaced by the D-type Light Six. This was fundamentally the same as the outgoing model with minor styling and interior updates, but with one major engineering change - namely the addition of Dubonnet suspension to the front, making the new Light Six the first mass-production British saloon car with independent front suspension. The Dubonnet system was a GM patent, also used on Chevrolet and Pontiac models in the US and on Opel cars in Europe. The D-type Light Six was priced at between £205 and £245 for the standard saloon depending on the exact specification, which was still a lower-than-average price for a car of the new Light Six's size, power, equipment and technical specification and this was another successful model for Vauxhall.\n\nThe overall strategy for Vauxhall continued to be to make smaller models with the latest engineering developments. Vauxhall and GM management planned a completely new three-model car range which would use cutting-edge unibody construction instead of the traditional body-on-frame design. The first mass-production unibody car, the Citroën Traction Avant began production in 1934, the same year that design work on the new Vauxhall range began. As well as designing an entirely new car body, this change required major expansion, renewal and investment in the Luton factory as well as a significant expansion of Vauxhall's engineering and design staff. The first of the new models was released in September 1937. This was the H-type 10-4 (the model number referring to its 10 tax-horsepower, four-cylinder engine). This was the first truly small Vauxhall in many years. As well as its advanced unibody structure - a first for a British saloon car - the 10-4 also featured an overhead valve engine, fully hydraulic brakes and Dubonnet front suspension. Other features included a full-synchromesh gearbox, mechanical windscreen wipers and a 'six-stage' carburetor. Priced at £168-182, the 10-4 was only slightly more expensive than old-fashioned equivalents from Austin and Morris and cost around £30 more than the cheapest 10-horsepower class car on sale, the Ford 7W . The model was promoted as \"The £1 Million Motor Car\", reflecting the supposed investment in its design and production and was noted for its excellent fuel economy of over 40mpg when touring due to its efficient modern engine and lightweight body. The 10-4 was considered to be the finest small car in the world at the time of its launch and initial demand greatly exceeded production capacity. Just six months after the 10-4's launch, the 10,000th example left Luton - a production record for the Vauxhall at the time. The H-type 10-4 was only the first and smallest in the proposed trio of similarly advanced unibody cars. The I-type 12-4 (essentially the same as the 10-4 but with a longer wheelbase and an enlarged engine) was introduced in September 1938 and the J-type 14-6 , replacing the old Light Six, was introduced the following month but sales did not begin until early 1939. This advanced three-model range was very well received by critics and buyers and placed Vauxhall in the vanguard of automotive engineering for the mass market in Britain. However the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 greatly restricted the sales of all new cars just as the new Vauxhall range was entering the market and production was reaching full flow. Car production was ceased entirely in May 1940, by which time over 50,000 10-4s, 10,000 12-4s and 15,000 14-6s had been built.\n\nDuring the Second World War, car production at Luton was suspended to allow Vauxhall to work on the new Churchill tank . Despite a bombing raid in August 1940, in which 39 employees were killed, it was taken from specification to production in less than a year, and assembled there (as well as at other sites). More than 5,600 Churchill tanks were built. Luton also produced around 250,000 lorries for the war effort, alongside the new Bedford Dunstable plant , which was opened in 1942, with Bedford designs being common in British use. As a morale booster for the company employees, on 23, 24, and 25 February 1944, Adelaide Hall appeared in concert at the factory in Luton, where she entertained the employees during their lunch break. In all, she performed in front of more than 10,000 workers; this was the first time that Vauxhall had contracted a star to perform at their factory for three consecutive days. \n\nVauxhall was one of the first English car makers to switch from wartime to civilian production, mostly due to the ease with which Bedford trucks in production for military use could be redirected to the civilian market. The first post-war civilian trucks were made a few days before VJ Day in August 1945, with Vauxhall car production resuming in September. These initial models were essentially unchanged from the three-model range (H-, I-, and J-type unibody designs) that had been launched just before the outbreak of war in 1939. However, they were now renamed simply as the Vauxhall Ten, Twelve and Fourteen respectively, were each available in a single body and specification (four-door saloons to what had been the Deluxe trim level) to ease production and had minor internal and external trim differences to account for shortages or extra costs of various materials.\n\nGovernment regulations of the time meant that 75% of production had to be sent for export, so very few of these revived models reached buyers in the United Kingdom. Further rationalisation occurred in 1946 when the Twelve ceased to be a distinct model and now shared the body of the Ten but with the larger-capacity engine. These models were superseded by 'new' cars in 1948. GM management had dictated that Luton should only utilise a single body design in order to maximise productivity and reduce supply costs. The British government had also revoked the RAC taxable horsepower system and replaced it with a flat charge per vehicle regardless of engine size. This meant that there was no longer such an imperative to offer similar models with different engine capacities to fit in the different bands of the old tax system. Therefore, the new 1948 L-Type Vauxhalls consisted of just a pair of models, both using the body structure, floorpan and many running gear parts of the H-type/Ten model. However Vauxhall's director of styling, David Jones, managed to fit brand new exterior panels to the front, rear and rear-quarters of the old body centre-section to give the L-type a modern look which shared its basic shape and features with GM's Chevrolet Fleetline of the same year, albeit at a much smaller scale.\n\nThe new models were the Wyvern (using the four-cylinder engine previously used in the Twelve) and the Velox using a new wide-bore development of the six-cylinder engine from the Fourteen. Otherwise, the L-Types reused the three-speed transmission (albeit with a switch to a column gear change , hydraulic brakes and Dubonnet suspension of the pre-war models essentially unchanged. Those predecessors had been advanced for their time so the Wyvern and Velox were still competitive despite being considered small and cramped alongside the likes of the Morris Minor or the A40 Devon of Austin. The Velox especially, with its smooth and powerful engine in a relatively small car, offered strong performance and good reliability to compete against the V8-powered Ford Pilot .\n\nThe L-Types were replaced by a truly new model, the E-Types, in 1951 with the new cars having been in development since 1948. GM was still restricting Vauxhall to a one-body policy and the range still consisted of two models differentiated mostly by their engines – the four-cylinder EIX Wyvern and the six-cylinder EIP Velox . While they were designed at Luton they drew a lot of influence from styling developments made in Detroit , especially the revised 1951-model year Chevrolets . The E-Types continued the use of unibody construction, but of a brand new and much larger design with full-width ' pontoon ' styling. They offered significantly more cabin and luggage space and a great deal of effort was put into both the styling of the interior and the reduction of vibration and noise. The complicated Dubonnet suspension system was replaced by more conventional design using coil springs and twin wishbones with telescopic dampers, while the rear axle retained leaf springs but also with the addition of telescopic dampers. The transmission and steering remained little-changed from the existing design.\n\nVauxhall planned and developed a new range of short-stroke overhead-valve engines for the E-Types but financial and production constraints meant that the first new Wyverns and Veloxes were launched with the same engines as the outgoing L-Type. In the bigger, heavier E-Type models these gave very poor performance, especially the Wyvern with an engine all-but unchanged since 1937. The new engines, both slightly larger than the existing design, were fitted to both models during 1952 and brought performance up to a competitive level. In terms of price and production the E-Type Vauxhalls were now full contenders in the mid-size car market in Britain, alongside the likes of the Ford Consul / Zephyr and especially the increasingly old-fashioned Hillman Minx . By 1953 Vauxhall was building 110,000 E-Type models at Luton per year, with around half of production going to export - mostly in the Commonwealth markets which still maintained preferential tariffs for British-made products.\n\nFor 1955, the E-Type Vauxhalls received a facelift with new frontal and interior styling and minor mechanical refinements. Most importantly, Vauxhall returned to offering three car models (albeit all still sharing a single body design) with the addition of the Cresta , which was a more luxuriously styled and appointed version of the Velox. Following GM practice from America, from this point Vauxhall began offering annual minor updates, improvements and styling changes to its cars to both keep up with competitors and to tempt existing owners to replace their car.\n\nSince the restarting of car production in 1945 the limiting factor for Vauxhall sales had been production, sometimes leading to lengthy waiting lists for customers. While the Luton factory had been expanded and modernised in the early 1950s, the main restriction was the lack of capacity for building the unitary bodyshells. Expansion of the body shop would require large investment that GM was reluctant to release and this was the main reason for Vauxhall relying on a single body design across three distinct models.\n\nIn 1954, GM management sanctioned a switch to a two-body line-up at Vauxhall with concurrent investment to expand both the body shop and production lines at Luton. The new model would replace the four-cylinder Wyvern with a smaller car using the same engine, bringing Vauxhall into line with the established norm for cars in the 1.5-litre class - the E-Type Wyvern was a significantly larger car than its direct competitors. The new car would be launched for 1957 alongside new Velox/Cresta models which could, correspondingly, be slightly enlarged since their body no longer had to be shared with a model in the class below.\n\nThe small model, named the F-Type Victor was announced first in February 1957. Although its engineering followed familiar Vauxhall lines - a unitary structure, independent front suspension with coil springs, a leaf-sprung live rear axle and a 1.5-litre four-cylinder overhead valve engine with a three-speed manual transmission with column-mounted change - it was, by necessity, virtually all brand new. The drivetrain was largely lifted from the outgoing E-Type Wyvern, but the engine received a higher compression ratio and updated carburation to account for the new widespread availability of high octane fuel and so made more power. Stylistically the Victor followed the familiar Vauxhall trend of following American styling trends, although the Victor took this to a new level by closely resembling the famous 1955 Chevrolet Bel Air , complete with tailfins , prominent 'flutes' on the bonnet (a modern evocation of a familiar Vauxhall styling cue dating back to the 1920s), wrap-around front and rear screens, large chromed bumpers and an exhaust tailpipe integrated into one of the rear overriders. A year after launch the Victor would also provide the basis for Vauxhall's first factory-built estate car .\n\nThe new P-Type Velox/Cresta models were announced in October 1957. Like the Victor these essentially featured updated versions of the drivetrain (and running gear) from the E-Type models in a new, larger and much more flamboyantly-styled body. American styling cues were again much in evidence, this time being heavily influenced by a 1954 Cadillac concept car called the Park Avenue.\n\nBoth the new Vauxhall models continued the success of their predecessors. The Victor achieved new sales records for Vauxhall and in the late 1950s was Britain's most exported car, being sold in most right-hand drive car markets such as Australia, New Zealand , South Africa , India , Pakistan , Thailand and Singapore . The model was also sold in left-hand drive form by General Motors in Canada (under the specially-created Envoy name and under the original Vauxhall Victor name through Pontiac dealerships in the USA. Nearly 400,000 F-Type Victors were built at Luton between the start of 1957 and the end of production in mid-1961. With the Victor taking the place of many previous Wyvern sales, the P-Type models did not sell in the same quantities as the entire E-Type range had, but over 180,000 were built between October 1957 and July 1962 with over 100,000 of those cars being exported.\n\nBoth the Victor and the Velox/Cresta received criticism for their overtly American styling, which many reviewers [ who? ] saw as gaudy against more conservative British tastes. Both models had their styling revised in 1959 to remove some of the more extreme styling details. Both models also quickly developed a reputation for rapid and severe structural corrosion. The F-Type Victor was especially badly affected by this issue, caused by a combination of thin-gauge steel to minimise weight, numerous moisture traps in its body design (for instance the hidden tailpipe design encouraged corrosive exhaust gases and condensation to collect in the rear wing corners), the fitting of a plasticised underseal treatment to the floorpan which served to trap moisture and dirt once it became chipped or cracked and the fact that the Victor was built in quantities and rates that the Luton plant had not previously dealt with.\n\nA manufacturing plant at Ellesmere Port , Cheshire, was opened in 1962, initially making components to supply to the production lines in Luton, before passenger-car production began there in 1964. \n\nIn 1963, production of the Vauxhall Viva small family car commenced, with the new car being aimed at the like of the Ford Anglia . The German version of the car was sold as the Opel Kadett . The locally assembled Vauxhall Viva was launched in Australia in May 1964. In 1966, Vauxhall's Slant Four engine went into production – the first production overhead camshaft inline-four to use a rubber timing belt . Also, the FD Victor was launched at the Earls Court Motor Show , considered by many to be one of Vauxhall's finest all-British styling efforts.\n\nDuring the 1960s, Vauxhall acquired a reputation for making rust-prone models. The corrosion protection built into models was tightened up significantly, but the reputation dogged the company until at least the early 1980s.\n\nIn 1967, Vauxhall became a Royal Warrant Holder : Motor Vehicle Manufacturers to HM The Queen – the Royal Mews. The warrant of HRH The Prince of Wales was added in 1994.\n\nBy the late 1960s, the company was achieving five-figure sales on its most popular models, including the entry-level Viva and the larger Victor .\n\nIn 1970, the HC Viva was launched, which went on to become Vauxhall's best-selling car of the decade, featuring among the 10 best-selling cars in Britain each year until after 1976, with production not finishing until 1979, when the Viva nameplate was finally discontinued after 16 years and three generations. In 1973, the Vauxhall Firenza \"Droopsnoot\" coupe was unveiled at the Earls Court Motor Show, introducing the public to Vauxhall's new aerodynamic look for all of its subsequent 1970s models.\n\nBy 1973, the Victor was losing sales in a market that was becoming increasingly dominated by the Ford Cortina . This was not enough to keep Vauxhall from being well behind market leaders like Ford in sales, and most of its range was struggling even to keep pace with Chrysler UK (formerly the Rootes Group ).\n\nVauxhall's sales began to increase from 1975, with the launch of two important new models, the Chevette , a small three- door hatchback that was the first car of its kind to be built in Britain, and the Cavalier , a stylish four-door saloon designed to compete head-to-head with the all-conquering Ford Cortina. A two-door coupe and three-door \"sport hatch\" had joined the Cavalier range by 1978, but there never was an estate version. The Cavalier helped Vauxhall regain lost ground in this crucial sector of the market, while the Chevette proved to be hugely popular in the growing supermini sector, as more buyers turned to smaller cars following the oil crisis of 1973.\n\nThe Chevette range later evolved into a three-door estate, as well as saloons with two or four doors. Both models were based on models produced by Opel, GM's German subsidiary, the Chevette being based on the Opel Kadett , but with a distinct front end. Along with the Chevrolet Chevette in the US and Canada, the Chevette and Kadett were built on GM's T-Car platform . Similarly, the Cavalier was based on the Opel Ascona , but featured the front end of the Manta , as did the Chevrolet Chevair in South Africa .\n\nThis marked the end of a long and gradual process by GM to consolidate its two European subsidiaries with preference for the larger, and in terms of both absolute sales and market share, more successful Opel, which sold 925 000 vehicles to Vauxhall's 143 600. Since the early 1960s, Vauxhalls, whilst being designed and built in the United Kingdom, increasingly shared their general specification, engineering features, and styling with Opel counterparts (the Viva with the Kadett and the Victor with the Rekord , for instance) even if the two cars were distinct, with few to any interchangeable parts.\n\nFrom the late 1960s and into the early 1970s, increasing economic turmoil in the UK, declining build quality, and increasing strike action throughout British industry (and in stark contrast, the Wirtschaftswunder or economic miracle of West Germany during the same period), plus the entry of the UK into the European Economic Community in 1973, made maintaining two parallel model lines serving similar markets increasingly undesirable. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe FE Series Victor , launched in 1972, would be the last all-British Vauxhall. Following the introduction of the Chevette and Cavalier, virtually all future Vauxhalls would be lightly restyled Opels, under what was described by the company's management as \"Opelisation\". The exceptions would be based on models from elsewhere in the GM organisation. However, Vauxhall retained its two British factories at Luton and Ellesmere Port, with most cars wearing the Vauxhall badge still being built in the UK.\n\nThe introduction of the Opel-based Vauxhalls marked a significant improvement in both the design and build quality of Vauxhall cars, which were now considered strong rivals to their Ford competitors. By the end of the 1970s, Vauxhall had boosted its market share substantially, and was fast closing in on Ford and British Leyland.\n\nIn 1978, Vauxhall strengthened its position in the executive car market with the launch of its all-new Carlton saloon and estate, which were facelifted versions of the German-built Opel Rekord . A year later, a more upmarket saloon model, the Senator , was launched under the Opel brand, and finally became available as a Vauxhall from 1983.\n\nBy 1979, Vauxhall had increased its market share substantially; it was still some way behind Ford and British Leyland, but had overtaken Talbot (the Peugeot -owned successor to Rootes and Chrysler UK ). By this time, GM had decided to withdraw the Vauxhall brand from most other European markets in favour of Opel. This saw an end to the export of Vauxhall models, as exports to Continental Europe had fallen from 32,000 units in 1970 to 12,900 units in 1978. \n\nBy 1981, these were largely confined to Chevettes sold in Germany. While Opel-built cars were exported to the UK and badged as Vauxhalls, no Vauxhall-built cars were exported badged as Opels. It would not be until 1990 that Vauxhall would resume left hand drive production for export. \n\nSimilarly, the use of Opel brand on the UK market would be confined to sporting models, and with the success and wide range choice of the new Vauxhall products of the early 1980s, the Manta was the only Opel-badged car being imported to the UK by the end of 1984. When the Manta was finally discontinued in 1988, Opel models were no longer officially imported to the UK. Its successor, the Calibra, was badged as a Vauxhall on the UK market.\n\nEarly in 1980, Vauxhall moved into the modern family hatchback market with its Astra range that replaced the aging Viva, and quickly became popular with buyers. The Astra was a rebadged version of the first front-wheel drive Opel Kadett, which had been launched in 1979, and was sold alongside the Astra for several years. Initially imported from Opel's plant in Bochum , it was later produced at the Vauxhall plant in Ellesmere Port. \n\nIn 1981, the company released the Mk2 Cavalier , the first Vauxhall of this size to offer front-wheel drive and a hatchback bodystyle. Built at the Luton plant, it really boosted Vauxhall's fortunes, with the Cavalier's sales for 1982 almost trebling its total for 1981, and peaking at more than 130,000 by 1984. During that time, sales of the Vauxhall brand more than doubled. This was complemented in 1983 with an estate , based on the Camira produced in Australia by Holden , with the tailgates for the Vauxhall version being built there and shipped to Luton. It was Britain's second-best selling car in 1984 and 1985, and spent most of its production life vying with the Ford Sierra for top place in the large family car market. The Cavalier was relaunched in 1988, an all-new format that won praise [ by whom? ] for its sleek looks and much-improved resistance to rust. [ citation needed ]\n\nApril 1983 had the launch of the Nova supermini, a rebadged version of the Spanish -built Opel Corsa. The new entry-level model in the Vauxhall range, it was available as a hatchback or a saloon and was solely built at the Zaragoza plant in Spain. This completed Vauxhall's regeneration, and by the end of the 1980s, it had overtaken Austin as Britain's second-most popular carmaker. The arrival of the Nova also spelled the end of the Chevette in 1984 after nearly a decade in production.\n\nThe Astra further strengthened its position in the market with an all-new model in the autumn of 1984, featuring an aerodynamic design reminiscent of Ford's larger Sierra.\n\nIn 1984, the aerodynamically styled Vauxhall Astra Mk2 built at the Ellesmere Port Plant became the first Vauxhall car to be elected European Car of the Year . From the spring of 1985, the Vauxhall Nova was also available as a four-door saloon and five-door hatchback.\n\nIn January 1986, Vauxhall launched the Belmont , a saloon version of the Astra, which offered more interior space and was almost as big as a Cavalier. However, this car failed to reach Vauxhall's expectations in terms of sales, and from 1989 was rebadged the Astra Belmont.\n\nVauxhall won another \"European Car of the Year\" award with its all-new Vauxhall Carlton , a rebadged Opel-built vehicle and badged Opel Omega in the rest of Europe, sealing the award for 1987. A year after the launch of the MK2 Carlton, Vauxhall revitalised its flagship Senator to create a new-generation luxury saloon.\n\nThe Luton-built Cavalier (Mk3) (sold as the Opel Vectra in Ireland and mainland Europe) entered its third generation in 1988 with an all-new sleek design that further enhanced its popularity. The Calibra coupé followed in 1989, which was officially the most aerodynamic production car in the world on its launch. Falling between the Cavalier and Senator was the Opel-built Carlton (Opel Rekord and later Opel Omega elsewhere) – relaunched in 1986, and was voted 1987 European Car of the Year , a large four-door family saloon. The two sports versions of the Carlton were the 3000 GSi and the Lotus Carlton , the latter being aimed at family-minded executives, and at 175 miles per hour (282 km/h), considered the fastest four-door production car at the time. The latest generation of Vauxhall models dispelled the image of rusting cars that had for so long put potential buyers off the Vauxhall brand. [ citation needed ]\n\nBy 1990, Vauxhall was preparing to launch the MK3 Astra, and its first 4X4 off-road vehicle, while a replacement for the Nova was also in development.\n\nIn 1991, Vauxhall's corporate headquarters were moved to Griffin House, formerly the company's design and testing building. In the same year, the third-generation Vauxhall Astra went on sale (with Opel versions adopting the Astra nameplate for the first time) and the saloon version badged Astra rather than Belmont. Vauxhall joined forces with Isuzu to produce the Frontera , a four-wheel drive off-roader available in short- and long-wheelbase versions.\n\nIn 1993, the Cavalier was firmly re-established as Britain's most popular large family car, with more than 130,000 sales, while the third-generation Astra (relaunched in 1991) with 100,000 sales was continuing to narrow the gap between itself and the best-selling Ford Escort . The decade-old Nova was axed in 1993, in favour of the all-new Corsa , adopting the European naming of the model; its distinctive styling and practical interior began attracting more sales than its predecessor had done.\n\nIn 1994, GM ceased production of Bedford Vehicles because their profits were decreasing over time. Bedford Vehicles had been Vauxhall's commercial vehicle arm, making successful vans, trucks, and lorries since the 1930s. The last \"true\" Bedford light commercials – the Bedford HA and Bedford CF panel vans – had already ceased production in 1983 and 1987, respectively, and had been replaced by licence-built versions of Isuzu and Suzuki vans such as the Midi and Rascal . Production of these models continued at Luton, now badged Vauxhall, but built by a separate company named IBC ( I suzu- B edford C ommercials). Also in 1994, the Vauxhall Carlton nameplate was abandoned after 16 years, and Omega took its place, becoming the first model to feature the new corporate \"V\" grille. Vauxhall also added another vehicle to its four-wheel drive line-up in the shape of the Isuzu-based Monterey . Vauxhall joined the expanding \"compact coupé\" market with its new Corsa-based Tigra model.\n\nThe Cavalier nameplate was discontinued in 1995 after 20 years, a full model after Opel had dropped its Ascona nameplate, Vauxhall adopting the common Vectra nameplate for its successor, completing a policy by General Motors that aligned and identically badged all Vauxhall and Opel models. By this time, many left hand drive Opel Vectras were being produced at Vauxhall's Luton plant. The following year, Luton would become the sole source for the estate version. The Vectra received disappointing feedback from the motoring public, and several well-known journalists, including Jeremy Clarkson , yet it was still hugely popular, and for a while after the 1999 facelift, it was actually more popular than Ford's highly acclaimed Mondeo . In 1996, Vauxhall launched the short-lived Sintra large MPV. The Astra entered its fourth generation in 1998, and offered levels of build quality and handling that were better than all of its predecessors. \n\nIn 1999, the seven-seater compact MPV Zafira , based on the Astra chassis, went on sale and the Vauxhall Monterey was withdrawn from sale in the UK, although it continued to sell in the rest of Europe as an Opel.\n\nIn the late 1990s, Vauxhall received criticism in several high-profile car surveys. In 1998, a Top Gear customer-satisfaction survey condemned the Vauxhall Vectra as the least satisfying car to own in Britain. A year later, the Vauxhall marque was ranked last by the same magazine's customer-satisfaction survey. The Vauxhall range received particular criticism for breakdowns, build-quality problems, and many other maladies, which meant that quality did not reflect sales success. Nevertheless, Vauxhall was competing strongly in the sales charts, and by 1999 was closer to Ford in terms of sales figures than it had been in years. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 2000, Vauxhall entered the sports car market with the Lotus -based VX220 roadster. It re-entered the coupé market with the Astra Coupé. The new Agila city car and a second-generation Corsa supermini also went on sale. On 12 December 2000, Vauxhall announced that car production at its Luton plant would cease in 2002, with the final vehicle being made in March 2002 following the end of production of the Vectra B and production of its replacement moving to Ellesmere Port alongside the Astra. Manufacture of vans (sold under the Vauxhall, Opel, Renault , and Nissan badges throughout Europe) continued at the IBC Vehicles plant in Luton. On 17 May 2006, Vauxhall announced the loss of 900 jobs from Ellesmere Port's 3,000 staff, part of significant worldwide staff reductions by GM. \n\nIn 2002, the all-new Vectra went on sale, alongside a large hatchback badged as the Signum , which arrived the following year. The year 2002 was one of the best ever for Vauxhall sales in the UK. The Corsa was Britain's second-most popular new car, and gave the marque top spot in the British supermini car sales charts for the first time. The Astra was Britain's third-best selling car that year, while the Vectra and the Zafira (a compact MPV launched in 1999) were just outside the top 10. The second-generation Vectra was launched in 2002 and was further improved over earlier Vectras, but was still hardly a class-leader, and now had to be content with lower sales due to a fall in popularity of D-sector cars, although a facelift in 2005 sparked a rise in sales.\n\nIn 2003, Vauxhall Omega production ended after nine years, with no direct replacement, while the Meriva mini-MPV was launched. Perhaps the most important Vauxhall product of the 2000s so far is the fifth-generation Astra, launched in early 2004, and praised by the motoring press for its dramatic styling. It was an instant hit with buyers, and was the nation's second-best selling car in 2005 and 2006, giving the Ford Focus its strongest competitor yet. Many police forces across the United Kingdom adopted the Astra as the standard patrol vehicle ( panda car ). Also in 2004, production of the Frontera ended after 13 years, with no direct replacement.\n\nIn 2006, the third generation of the Vauxhall Corsa went on sale, after having its world premier launch at the 2006 British International Motor Show at ExCeL London . The second-generation Corsa had been Britain's most popular supermini for most of its production life, but by 2006, it had started to fall behind the best of its competitors, so an all-new model was launched. This Corsa sold far better than either of the previous Corsas, and it was an instant hit with buyers. Also in 2006, the second-generation Zafira was the 10th-best selling car in the UK, the first time that an MPV had featured in the top 10 in Britain.\n\nIn 2007, Vauxhall's new 4x4, the Vauxhall Antara , was released in July. Vauxhall's powerful VXR8 that came with 306 kilowatts (416 PS ; 410 bhp ) was also introduced.\n\nIn 2008, Vauxhall began rebranding with a modified corporate logo. The Vauxhall Insignia was launched at the 2008 British International Motor Show at ExCeL London, replacing the Vectra and won another \"European Car of the Year\". Vauxhall launched the new Agila city car.\n\nIn 2009, a new generation of the Vauxhall Astra was launched.\n\nOn 30 May 2009, a deal was announced that was to lead to the spin-off of the Vauxhall and Opel brands into a new company. On 1 June 2009, Vauxhall Motors' troubled parent company, General Motors, filed for bankruptcy in a court in New York. By then, the sale of Vauxhall and its German sister subsidiary, Opel, was being negotiated as part of a strategy driven by the German government to ring fence the businesses from any General Motors asset liquidation. The sale to Canadian-owned Magna International was agreed on 10 September 2009, with the approval of the German government. During the announcement regarding the sale, Magna promised to keep the Vauxhall factory at Ellesmere Port open until 2013, but could not guarantee any further production after that date. On 3 November 2009, the GM board called off the Magna deal after coming to the conclusion that Opel and Vauxhall Motors was crucial to GM's global strategy. \n\nIn 2010, the new Vauxhall Movano was launched and a new Meriva (launched at Geneva Motor Show ) went on sale in mid-2010.\n\nThe Ampera E-Rev, short for extended-range electric vehicle, went on sale in the UK in 2011 with a 16 kWh, 400 lb (180 kg) lithium-ion battery pack that delivers 40 miles (64 km) of motoring and a 1.4-litre petrol engine that extends the car's range to 350 miles (560 km). It won the \"European Car of the Year\". A new Vauxhall Combo went on sale in late 2011 and a facelifted Corsa went on sale in early 2011. The Zafira Tourer compact MPV was released in late 2011.\n\nIn 2012, the Vauxhall Adam city car was launched at the Paris Motor Show in late 2012, with sales beginning in early 2013. A new Vauxhall Mokka compact SUV was launched at the 2012 Geneva Motor Show .\n\nIn May 2012, GM announced plans to move much of the production of Astra vehicles from mainland Europe to the UK. The company announced it would invest £125 million in the Ellesmere Port factory and spend about £1bn in the UK component sector. It is reported that Astras produced at Ellesmere Port contain only 25% British parts, far below the typical 50 to 55% local content requirement Britain would have to agree to in bilateral trade deals. \n\nHydroGen4 is the successor of the fuel-cell vehicle Opel HydroGen3 , developed by General Motors/Opel and presented in 2007 at the IAA in Frankfurt and was expected to hit the market in 2016. \n\nIn December 2015, safety officials asked Vauxhall to initiate a full safety recall of the Zafira B model, due to a worrying level of \"improper repairs\"'. \n\nOn 3 March 2017, sources revealed that the American group General Motors had reached a tentative agreement with Groupe PSA for the acquisition of the Vauxhall and Opel brands and the complete Vauxhall/Opel automobile business.On 6 March 2017, GM and Groupe PSA announced their agreement that PSA would buy GM's Vauxhall and Opel subsidiaries in a deal worth €2.2 billion. In preparation for the sale, the ownership of all GM plants and Vauxhall/Opel sales organisations in Europe (except the Turin development center, and GM Europe with the sales organisations for Cadillac and Chevrolet) was transferred to Adam Opel GmbH in Rüsselsheim, and then at end of June 2017, in one package from Adam Opel GmbH to its subsidiary Opel Automobile GmbH, whose ownership was transferred to Peugeot S.A. by 1 August 2017. The historic Adam Opel GmbH remains property of GM, with the sole purpose of paying out the factory pensions of the former Opel workers who left up to 31 July 2017.\n\nOn 18 September 2017, Vauxhall's official company name was changed from General Motors UK Limited, in use since 16 April 2008, back to its original Vauxhall Motors Limited. On 7 May 2019, Vauxhall left its Griffin House headquarters in Luton for new offices at Chalton House, based in Chalton , on the northern outskirts of Luton. \n\nOn 16 January 2021, Groupe PSA and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles merged to form Stellantis . In 2023, the Chalton House headquarters and Vauxhall Aftersales (parts) warehouse was demolished after plans to redevelop the site for several industrial units was approved by the local councils for the site. Vauxhall's registered office in the UK is now listed as Pinley House in Coventry, along with several other legal entities associated with Stellantis. In November 2024, Stellantis announced they were closing the Luton plant and concentrating all electric van production at Ellesmere Port with ICE production transferring to plants in Europe. This would lead to the loss of up to 1100 jobs. The Luton factory closed on 28 March 2025. \n\nThe following tables list current and announced Vauxhall production vehicles as of 2022:\n\nThe VXR range was analogous to the OPC range made by Opel Performance Center in Europe and the HSV range made by Holden Special Vehicles in Australia. The VXR models ranged from hot hatchbacks such as the Corsa VXR and Astra VXR , to imported Australian muscle cars including the Monaro , VXR8 , and VXR8 Maloo as well as high-performance variants of family cars.\n\nThe VXR badge was intended to be a symbol of the combined technological resources of the global General Motors group, and the recognised expertise of consultants Lotus and the Triple Eight Racing Team .\n\nSince the purchase of the Vauxhall brand by Stellantis (then PSA Group ) in 2017, the VXR brand has been ushered into hiatus. The below table shows all VXR vehicles produced by, or marketed by Vauxhall to date.\n\nCars designed by independent Vauxhall:\n\nCars designed after acquisition by General Motors:\n\nCars designed after acquisition by PSA/Stellantis:\n\nBedford branded\n\nVauxhall branded\n\nGeneral Motors began to merge the product lines of Vauxhall and Opel in the early 1970s, and by the end of the decade had replaced the entire range of cars with a new family of Opel developed models, which initially were substantially modified by Vauxhall for the British market, but eventually this practice was replaced by a policy of badge engineering , where Vauxhall vehicles would be differentiated from their Opel counterparts only on badging, trim and specification. It also heralded an era when GM started to leverage other parts of its empire to develop a series of globally shared vehicle platforms, powertrains and entire models across its various subsidiaries (examples included the T-body and J-body platforms) which saw Vauxhall vehicles contain commonality with other GM products throughout the world.\n\nThe 1963 HA Viva was developed under some secrecy and exhibited remarkable similarities with the Opel Kadett released a year previously, while the 1972 FE Victor was essentially the first overt exponent of this strategy, sharing its platform and several body fittings with the Opel Rekord D , although it still retained Vauxhall-designed running gear and had no interchangeable body panels. By this point, GM had begun to map out a shared platform strategy for Vauxhall, Opel and Holden, with four basic size classes - the S-body (supermini), T-body (sub-compact), U-body (extended subcompact), and V-body (executive). The T-body was the first to be unveiled in the form of the Opel Kadett C in 1973. Vauxhall had developed its own concept for the smaller S-body car which would have featured front-wheel drive, but for budgetary reasons the S-car project was abandoned and merged with the T-body project with the car emerging as the Vauxhall Chevette in 1975, essentially being the Opel Kadett C featuring 'Droopsnoot' styling (first prototyped on the HPF Firenza ), but with an iteration of the hatchback body shell developed as part of the S-body studies. (the S-body designation was later resurrected for the Corsa A/Nova in 1982). The Chevette would later be made available in all of the equivalent Opel Kadett body styles except the coupe.\n\nThe larger U-body car was similarly supposed to have Vauxhall-specific bodywork, but GM management cancelled its development months from its release and the resulting Cavalier emerged in 1975 as a rebadged Opel Ascona B with the similarly modified front and rear styling as the Chevette. The range topping V-body cars were the last to emerge in 1978, to replace the FE Victor, the first being the Carlton - essentially the Opel Rekord E , with a droopsnoot nose and lightly modified interior. The flagship members of the V-body family - the Viceroy and Royale - were rebadged versions of the Opel Commodore C and Senator/Monza respectively, imported from Germany. The V-body was also adapted for the Australian market in the form of the Holden Commodore .\n\nTherefore, by the end of the 1970s most Vauxhalls were based on Opel designs, but with Vauxhall engines preserved in the form of the Viva-sourced 1256 unit fitted to the Chevette and Cavalier, and the much larger 2279cc slant-four for the homologation-special Chevette HS. However . These were also sold in left hand drive in continental European markets, including the Netherlands , Belgium , the Scandinavian countries, Italy and Portugal , in competition with their Opel counterparts. \n\nWith the 1979 demise of the last Vauxhall car developed with no Opel influence - the Viva (although the last Vauxhall designed vehicle overall to go out of production was the Bedford CF panel van in 1986) - GM policy was for future Vauxhall models to be, in effect, rebadged Opels, designed and developed primarily in Rüsselsheim . The original Astra , launched in 1980, set the eventual precedent for all GM Europe vehicles from that point onward – apart from the badging it had no styling or engineering difference from its Opel sister – the Kadett D. Until the early 1980s, GM dealers in the United Kingdom sold highly similar Opel and Vauxhall models alongside each other, Opel having been introduced in 1967, and by 1980 the two marques were still competing with each other with a near identical product range. This policy of duplication was phased out when Opel and Vauxhall formally combined their British marketing operations in 1981. The Vauxhall and Opel dealer networks were merged and rebranded as \"Vauxhall-Opel\". By 1982, most of the Opel lineup was discontinued in the United Kingdom in favour of their Vauxhall badged equivalents. Opel was instead repositioned as a performance-luxury brand – the Opel Manta coupé remained, whilst the Vauxhall Royale was replaced in the line-up by its Opel equivalent (the Senator / Monza ). However, this strategy was gradually abandoned – the Senator reverted to being badged as a Vauxhall for the 1985 model year, and the Opel Monza disappeared at the end of 1987, whilst the Manta was withdrawn in 1988. \n\nSimilarly, the Vauxhall brand was dropped by GM in Ireland in favour of the German brand Opel. Other RHD markets such as Malta and Cyprus soon following. In New Zealand, the brand was withdrawn in favour of Holden after the demise of the Chevette. GM Europe then began to standardise model names across both brands in the early 1990s. The Vauxhall Astra and Opel Kadett, for example, were both called Astra from 1991 onwards and the Vauxhall Nova (Opel Corsa A) assumed the Corsa name for its next generation in 1993. The change was completed in 1995 when the Vauxhall Cavalier Mk 3 (Opel Vectra A) was replaced by the Opel Vectra B, called Vauxhall Vectra . Apart from the VX220, sold by Opel as the Speedster, all of Vauxhall's subsequent models have had the same names as those of Opel. However, the 2015 Viva revives earlier practice due to its Opel equivalent, the Karl, intentionally invoking Karl Opel, the second proprietor of the Opel business. Despite this, the Adam, named after his father and the founder of the company, is sold in Britain without a name change, potentially as it appears less overtly German.\n\nFrom 1994, Vauxhall models differed from Opels in their distinctive grille – featuring a \"V\", incorporating the Vauxhall badge. This was also used by Holden in New Zealand on both the Astra and Vectra, by Chevrolet in Brazil on the Mk1 Chevrolet Astra (Opel Astra F) and on the Indian version of the Opel Astra. The \"V\" badging was an echo of the fluted V-shaped bonnets that had been used in some form on all Vauxhall cars since the very first. The \"V\" grille was not, however, used on the Vectra-replacing Insignia , unveiled in 2008 and the 2009 Vauxhall Astra and the 2010 Vauxhall Meriva . All the above, plus the US Saturn brand up to its demise in 2009, used the same grille bar with the \"V\" almost entirely muted out. These bars all carried identical badge mounts, enabling brand badges to be readily interchangeable. The Opel-badged versions in right-hand drive form still however find their way into the United Kingdom; either as grey imports from Ireland or Malta, or are sold as new from car supermarkets who have sourced Irish specification vehicles in bulk.\n\nA model unique to the Vauxhall range was the high-performance Monaro coupé , which was sourced from and designed by Holden in Australia. Although this model was also produced in left hand drive (LHD) for markets like the US (where it was known as the Pontiac GTO ) and for the Middle East (as the Chevrolet Lumina Coupe ), the model was not offered by Opel in mainland Europe. Imports of this vehicle were limited to 15,000 to avoid additional safety testing. Other vehicles confirmed by Vauxhall, but not by Opel, were the Holden Commodore SS-V and the HSV GTS . Vauxhall confirmed the importation of the GTS just after the reborn Opel GT roadster was announced as not being imported into the UK ... and the bulk of Holden/HSV cars that were imported post-2006 were badged as the Vauxhall VXR8 saloon.\n\nThe bodywork for the Holden Camira estate was used for the Vauxhall Cavalier estate in the UK (though not for the identical Opel Ascona in the rest of Europe) – conversely the rear bodywork of the T-car Vauxhall Chevette estate and Bedford Chevanne van was used for the respective Holden Gemini versions. Vauxhall's compact car, the Viva , formed the basis of the first HB-series Holden Torana in Australia in 1967.\n\nMany cars badged as Opels, even LHD models, are produced by Vauxhall for export. Vauxhall has built some Holdens for export, too, notably Vectra-As to New Zealand and Astra-Bs to both Australia and New Zealand. [ citation needed ]\n\nVauxhall is headquartered in Luton, Bedfordshire, and has major manufacturing facilities in Luton (commercial vehicles, owned by sister company IBC Vehicles ) and Ellesmere Port , the United Kingdom (passenger cars).\n\nThe Luton plant currently employs around 900 staff and has a capacity of approximately 100,000 units. The plant site has a total area of 4.17 million square feet (387,000 square metres). The plant currently produces the Vivaro light commercial van. \n\nThe Ellesmere Port plant currently employs around 1,880 staff and has a capacity of approximately 187,000 units. The plant site has a total area of 13.02 million square feet (1,209,366 square metres). The plant currently produces the Astra and Astra Sports Tourer. \n\nFrom 1942 to 1987 Vauxhall operated a truck and bus vehicle assembly plant in Dunstable , Bedfordshire. Developed and opened by Vauxhall in 1942 under instruction from the Ministry of Production as a shadow factory , it became a production site for Bedford Vehicles in the 1950s. \n\nVauxhall's original car plant in Luton stood next to the commercial vehicle plant. After production ceased there in 2002, the plant was demolished and, after several proposals for redevelopment, permission was granted for the site to be redeveloped as the Napier Park in January 2014. \n\nThe griffin emblem, which is still in use, is derived from the coat of arms of Falkes de Breauté , a mercenary soldier who was granted the Manor of Luton for services to King John in the thirteenth century. By marriage, he also gained the rights to an area near London, south of the Thames . The house he built, Fulk's Hall, became known in time as Vauxhall . Vauxhall Iron Works adopted this emblem from the coat of arms to emphasise its links to the local area. When Vauxhall Iron Works moved to Luton in 1905, the griffin emblem coincidentally returned to its ancestral home.\n\nThe logo as pictured used to be square, but it is now circular, to enable it to fit in the same recess designed for the circular Opel emblem. Since the 1920s, the griffin has been redesigned and released nine times. 2008 saw the release of a revised version of the 2005 logo. Bill Parfitt , chairman and managing director of GM UK, said, \"While the new-look Griffin pays homage to our 100-year-plus manufacturing heritage in the UK, it also encapsulates Vauxhall's fresh design philosophy, first showcased in the current Astra, and set to continue with Insignia.\" \n\nVauxhall Motors sponsored the Football Conference , the highest non-league division of English football , from 1986 until 1998. It took over from Gola , and remained in association with the league for twelve years, before ending its backing and being replaced by Nationwide Building Society . In 2011, Vauxhall became the primary sponsor for the home nations national football teams (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales). \n\nVauxhall has competed successfully in several forms of motorsport .\n\nDuring the 1970s Vauxhall had a strong presence on the British rallying scene. The Magnum coupe was heavier and less powerful than the dominant Ford Escort , but still put up some strong performances in the hands of drivers such as Will Sparrow and Brian Culcheth. From 1976, Vauxhall decided to heighten their profile in the sport by building a homologation -special version of the Vauxhall Chevette , known as the Chevette HS. This was a much more serious contender, and in the hands of drivers such as Pentti Airikkala , Tony Pond , Russell Brookes and Jimmy McRae it and its successor version, the Chevette HSR, won many events in Britain and Europe. Airikkala won the British Rally Championship in a Chevette in 1979.\n\nThe Chevette was retired in 1983, and effort was concentrated for the next few years on the Group B Opel Manta 400 . However, the Vauxhall Astra and Vauxhall Nova were campaigned in the lower power classes during the mid-1980s, and became popular amateurs' cars thanks to their reliability, ease of tuning and ready supply of parts. After the banning of Group B in 1986 the Group A Astra returned to the forefront. As a two-litre, front-wheel-drive car it was unable to challenge the four-wheel-drive cars for outright victory, but did score top ten placings on several World Championship events. Louise Aitken-Walker won the ladies' World Championship in 1990 in an Astra, despite a serious accident on that year's Rally of Portugal when her car rolled down a hillside and into a lake.\n\nDuring 1991–92 serious consideration was given to campaigning the four-wheel-drive version of the Vauxhall Calibra in British and possibly world rallies, and a trial version contested the 1993 Swedish Rally in the hands of Stig Blomqvist . However, the cost was judged prohibitive, and in any case the 'Formula 2' category had been introduced into British rallying. The latest version of the Astra was an ideal contender, and won the category in the 1993 and 1994 championships, driven by David Llewellin . Vauxhall campaigned successive versions of the Astra in the British championship until the late 1990s.\n\nVauxhall first entered the British Touring Car Championship with the Vauxhall Cavalier in 1989. The lead driver was John Cleland , who remained with the team until his retirement in 1999. The Cavalier was competitive, and often the fastest front-wheel-drive car in the series, and Cleland was second in the title race in 1992, and then fourth in the following two years. In 1995, however, he won the title (adding to his 1989 title win in an Astra). The Cavalier was replaced by the Vectra for 1996. Yvan Muller was sixth in the 1999 British Touring Car Championship and fourth in 2000.\n\nIn 2001 the BTCC regulations changed and Vauxhall brought the Astra Coupe into the BTCC. The Astra would dominate the BTCC between 2001 and 2004 with the drivers title won by Jason Plato in 2001, James Thompson in 2002 – 2004 and Yvan Muller in 2003. Vauxhall also won the Manufacturers Award and Teams Award every year also.\n\nIn 2005 the Astra Coupe was replaced by the Astra Sport Hatch however it was not as competitive as the Astra Coupe and restricted success for Vauxhall in 2005 and 2006.\n\nIn 2007 The regulations changed again and Vauxhall brought the Vectra back. The Vectra brought success back to Vauxhall after Fabrizio Giovanardi won the 2007 and 2008 BTCC championship. Fabrizio Giovanardi finished 3rd in the championship in 2009 before Vauxhall pulled sponsorship out at the end of 2009 due to and the economic crisis and lack of official manufacturers in the BTCC.\n\nIn November 2016 it was announced that Vauxhall would return to the BTCC in partnership with Power Maxed Racing. It was later announced that former BTCC and WTCC driver Tom Chilton would lead the team with Senna Proctor as his teammate. The team earned a podium at their first meeting of the year at Brands Hatch, and their best finish was a 2nd at Silverstone, with Rob Huff standing in for Tom Chilton.\n\n2018 saw the team return as TAG Autosport with Power Maxed Racing , with Senna Proctor this time teaming up with Josh Cook . The first round of the year saw Senna Proctor take both his and the Team's first win at Brands Hatch, as he made an incredible drive from P28 to take the chequered flag. Josh Cook followed at Donington just a few weeks later with a Pole Position and a Lights to Flag victory in the first race, followed by yet another podium in Race 3. Another win followed for Cook at the following round at Thruxton. Throughout the year the team managed another 10 podiums, and dropped no lower than 3rd in the Teams Standings for the entire season. More than 50% of race finishes saw at least 1 driver in the Top 10.\n\nFor 2019, the decision was made to run as Sterling Insurance with Power Maxed Racing, with two new drivers; Jason Plato , the most successful driver in British history (by race wins) and former Independents Champion Rob Collard .",
  "A council architect or municipal architect (properly titled county architect , borough architect , city architect or district architect ) is an architect employed by a local authority . The name of the position varies depending on the type of local authority and is similar to that of county surveyor or chief engineer used by some authorities. Council architects are employed in the United Kingdom but also used in Malta and Ireland . \n\nThe role was once widespread with many counties, cities and other local authorities employing their own architect to design public works . Council architects acted as designer, client and regulator for their authority, and having significant buying power, they were able to influence suppliers to accommodate their requirements. They worked closely with the council planning department, with whom they were often co-located. In 1953, the London County Council (LCC) employed more than 1,500 people within its architects department. \n\nThe LCC architects were key innovators, with the guaranteed salary and relative anonymity allowing them to develop experimental designs without risk to income or the stigma of failure. The LCC architects department also provided research funding, including for the Survey of London , and had in-house testing and development teams. The smaller scale firms in private practice at the time could not provide such luxuries. \n\nThe trend in recent decades has been for councils to close their architects departments. As of 2015, there were 237 council architects in England, 159 in Scotland and 24 in Wales. The biggest employers are Hampshire (44), Glasgow (18), the Highland Council (13) and Lancashire (11). Despite their predecessors having one of the largest and most active architects departments in the country, no London borough now employs more than five council architects. \n\nOnce closed, a local authority is highly unlikely to revive an architects department and will instead rely on outsourcing to private firms. One exception is the London Borough of Croydon, which re-established a council architect position in 2015. Hampshire County Architects remains the largest council architects department, and is recognized as a leader in its field, winning several awards for its school designs since the 1980s. ",
  "Coca flour is made from whole ground dried coca leaves harvested from the coca plant , Erythroxylum coca or Erythroxylum novogranatense . Coca flour is commercially produced and sold in stores in Argentina , Bolivia , Colombia and Peru . \n\nCoca flour is primarily used regionally as a nutritional additive in breads, cakes, candy, juices and cereals. In the Andes it is widely accepted as a natural medicine, and used as a remedy for gastritis , colic , rheumatism , arthritis , dry cough , cholesterol and diabetes . \n\nCoca flour is also used as a capsulized food supplement as it contains all natural properties of the whole coca leaf including the essential minerals ( calcium , potassium , phosphorus ), vitamins ( B1 , B2 , C , and E ) and nutrients such as protein and fiber . ",
  "Meunière ( UK : / ˌ m ɜː n i ˈ ɛər / , US : / ˌ m ʌ n -/ , French: [mønjɛʁ] ⓘ ; lit. ' miller's wife ' ) is both a French sauce and a method of preparation, primarily for fish, consisting of brown butter , chopped parsley , and lemon . The name suggests a simple rustic nature, i.e. that to cook something à la meunière was originally to cook it by first dredging it in flour. \n\nMeunière sauce is a variation on a brown butter sauce. While there is general agreement on the addition of parsley and lemon, some include ingredients such as Worcestershire sauce , red wine vinegar, or beef stock. [ citation needed ] Another common variation is to use pecans rather than almonds in an amandine . \n\nThere are two primary ways to prepare the fish (most popularly, sole or trout). One is by sautéing —first dredging the fish in seasoned flour (white flour or corn flour) and then cooking in a hot sauté pan with a small amount of clarified butter . The alternative method is to pan-fry or deep fry the floured fish. In pan frying, oil or a combination of oil and butter is used—up to perhaps 2 cm deep. Deep frying is done in either a large fry pot or in a stand-alone deep fryer. The floured fish is completely submerged in the hot oil. The frying techniques result in a crisper texture, but the sauce will need to be made separately. The sautéed fish will have a softer skin by comparison, but allows for the possibility of creating the sauce à la minute after the fish has been removed by adding fresh butter, parsley, and lemon. \n\nTrout meunière and its variation Trout amandine ( speckled seatrout crusted in almonds , traditionally served with a meunière sauce) are bedrock dishes of New Orleans Creole cuisine . The abundance of seafood from the nearby Gulf of Mexico makes the simplicity of the meunière style appropriate. Galatoire's claims to sell more Trout meunière amandine than any other dish. Soft-shell crab and redfish are also often available à la meunière . Oysters en brochette is typically served with a meuniere sauce. [ citation needed ]",
  "Alternative manga or underground manga is a Western term for Japanese comics that are published outside the more commercial manga market, or which have different art styles, themes, and narratives to those found in the more popular manga magazines. The term was taken from the similar alternative comics . The artistic center of alternative manga production was from the 1960s until the 1990s the manga magazine Garo , which is why in Japan, alternative manga are often called Garo-kei ( ガロ系 , lit. ' Garo-tique ' ) , even if they were not published in Garo . \n\nAlternative manga originated in the lending libraries of post-war Japan, which charged a small fee for borrowing books. This market was essentially its own marketplace with many manga being printed exclusively for it. The market was notorious amongst parental groups for containing more lewd content than the normal mainstream manga publishers would allow. Consequently, the market tended to appeal to a slightly older adolescent audience, rather than the child-dominated audience of the mainstream magazine anthologies of the time.\n\nIn 1958 an author named Yoshihiro Tatsumi decided to create comics that had a darker and more realistic tone. Rejecting the title of manga, which in Japanese means \"frivolous pictures\", Tatsumi instead called these comics gekiga , meaning \"dramatic pictures\". This was similar to the way in which the term \" graphic novel \" was advocated by American alternative cartoonists, over the term \"comics\".\n\nAs gekiga gained popularity, the lending libraries gradually collapsed due to the growing economy of Japan during the 1960s. As a result, many gekiga artists left the lending libraries and began to set up their own magazine anthologies. One of these anthologies, Garo , was designed to showcase the newest talents in the manga business. Garo started out as being a gekiga magazine but would eventually grow to a new style with the work of Yoshiharu Tsuge . Tsuge is widely credited with bringing a more personal stance to manga, allowing for manga to be an abstract reflection of his own experiences. Some critics have gone as far as to call his work the comics equivalent to an I novel .\n\nAs Garo gained popularity particularly with the youth movements of the 1960s, many other magazines followed in its footsteps. At around the same time gekiga elements began appearing in mainstream manga magazines, with Osamu Tezuka fully embracing the style and doing more work aimed at older audiences. Eventually Tezuka would start up a magazine called COM , as his answer to Garo . With gekiga being integrated into mainstream manga, and manga being accepted as an art form by the masses around this time period.\n\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, alternative manga influenced mainstream publishers of seinen manga . Magazines like Morning and Afternoon published artists who had styles reminiscent of the then-considered \"retro\" alternative manga from the 1960s and 1970s. Sharon Kinsella writes: \"These artists used unusual and 'artistic' styles not previously published in high-circulation commercial magazines\". Manga critic Tomofuse Kure called this phenomenon Garo-kei (\"Garo-tique\"). ",
  "Stop motion (also known as stop frame animation ) is an animated filmmaking and special effects technique in which objects are physically manipulated in small increments between individually photographed frames so that they will appear to exhibit independent motion or change when the series of frames is played back. Any kind of object can thus be animated, but puppets with movable joints ( puppet animation ) or plasticine figures (clay animation or claymation ) are most commonly used. Puppets, models or clay figures built around an armature are used in model animation . Stop motion with live actors is often referred to as pixilation . Stop motion of flat materials such as paper, fabrics or photographs is usually called cutout animation .\n\nThe term \"stop motion\", relating to the animation technique, is often spelled with a hyphen as \"stop-motion\"—either standalone or as a compound modifier . Both orthographic variants, with and without the hyphen, are correct, but the hyphenated one has a second meaning that is unrelated to animation or cinema: \"a device for automatically stopping a machine or engine when something has gone wrong\". \n\nBefore the advent of chronophotography in 1878, a small number of picture sequences were photographed with subjects in separate poses. These can now be regarded as a form of stop motion or pixilation, but very few results were meant to be animated. Until celluloid film base was established in 1888 and set the standard for the moving image, animation could only be presented via mechanisms such as the zoetrope .\n\nIn 1849, Joseph Plateau published a note about improvements for his Fantascope (a.k.a. phénakisticope ). A new translucent variation had improved picture quality and could be viewed with both eyes, by several people at the same time. Plateau stated that the illusion could be advanced even further with an idea communicated to him by Charles Wheatstone : a combination of the fantascope and Wheatstone's stereoscope . Plateau thought the construction of a sequential set of stereoscopic image pairs would be the more difficult part of the plan than adapting two copies of his improved fantascope to be fitted with a stereoscope. Wheatstone had suggested using photographs on paper of a solid object, for instance a statuette. Plateau concluded that for this purpose 16 plaster models could be made with 16 regular modifications. He believed such a project would take much time and careful effort, but would be quite worth it because of the expected marvelous results. The plan was never executed, possibly because Plateau was almost completely blind by this time.\n\nIn 1852, Jules Duboscq patented a \"Stéréoscope-fantascope ou Bïoscope\" (or abbreviated as stéréofantascope) stroboscopic disc . The only known extant disc contains stereoscopic photograph pairs of different phases of the motion of a machine. Due to the long exposure times necessary to capture an image with the photographic emulsions of the period, the sequence could not be recorded live and must have been assembled from separate photographs of the various positions of the machinery.\n\nIn 1855, Johann Nepomuk Czermak published an article about his Stereophoroskop and other experiments aimed at stereoscopic moving images. He mentioned a method of sticking needles in a stroboscopic disc so that it looked like one needle was being pushed in and out of the cardboard when animated. He realized that this method provided basically endless possibilities to make different 3D animations. He then introduced two methods to animate stereoscopic pairs of images, one was basically a stereo viewer using two stroboscopic discs and the other was more or less similar to the later zoetrope . Czermak explained how suitable stereoscopic photographs could be made by recording a series of models, for instance to animate a growing pyramid. \n\nOn 27 February 1860, Peter Hubert Desvignes received British patent no. 537 for 28 monocular and stereoscopic variations of cylindrical stroboscopic devices (much like the later zoetrope). Desvignes' Mimoscope , received an Honourable Mention \"for ingenuity of construction\" at the 1862 International Exhibition in London. Desvignes \"employed models, insects and other objects, instead of pictures, with perfect success\". \n\nIn 1874, Jules Janssen made several practice discs for the recording of the passage of Venus with his series Passage de Vénus with his photographic revolver . He used a model of the planet and a light source standing in for the sun. While actual recordings of the passage of Venus have not been located, some practice discs survived and the images of one were turned into a short animated film decades after the development of cinematography .\n\nIn 1887, Étienne-Jules Marey created a large zoetrope with a series of plaster models based on his chronophotographs of birds in flight. \n\nIt is estimated that 80 to 90 percent of all silent films are lost. Extant contemporary movie catalogs, reviews and other documentation can provide some details on lost films, but this kind of written documentation is also incomplete and often insufficient to properly date all extant films or even identify them if original titles are missing. Possible stop motion in lost films is even harder to trace. The principles of animation and other special effects were mostly kept a secret, not only to prevent use of such techniques by competitors, but also to keep audiences interested in the mystery of the magic tricks. \n\nStop motion is closely related to the stop trick , in which the camera is temporarily stopped during the recording of a scene to create a change before filming is continued (or for which the cause of the change is edited out of the film). In the resulting film, the change will be sudden and a logical cause of the change will be mysteriously absent or replaced with a fake cause that is suggested in the scene. The oldest known example is used for the beheading in Edison Manufacturing Company 's 1895 film The Execution of Mary Stuart . The technique of stop motion can be interpreted as repeatedly applying the stop trick. In 1917, clay animation pioneer Helena Smith-Dayton referred to the principle behind her work as \"stop action\", a synonym of \"stop motion\".\n\nFrench trick film pioneer Georges Méliès claimed to have invented the stop-trick and popularized it by using it in many of his short films. He reportedly used stop-motion animation in 1899 to produce moving letterforms. \n\nSpanish filmmaker Segundo de Chomón (1871–1929) made many trick films in France for Pathé . He has often been compared to Georges Méliès as he also made many fantasy films with stop tricks and other illusions (helped by his wife, Julienne Mathieu ).\n\nLe théâtre de Bob (April 1906) features stop motion with dolls and objects to represent a fictional automated theatre owned by Bob, played by a live-action child actor. The film used to be credited to Chomón, but he didn't come to Paris (to work for Pathé ) until later. Direction and special effects have been attributed to Gaston Velle. \n\nDe Chomón's La maison ensorcelée (December 1907, or 1906 ) features stop-motion-animated cuttlery and food, among other special effects that depict paranormal acitivity.\n\nDe Chomón's Sculpteur moderne was released on 31 January 1908 and features heaps of clay molding itself into detailed sculptures that are capable of minor movements. The final sculpture depicts an old woman and walks around before it's picked up, squashed and molded back into a sitting old lady. \n\nAmerican film pioneer Edwin S. Porter filmed a single-shot \"lightning sculpting\" film with a baker molding faces from a patch of dough in Fun in a Bakery Shop (1902), considered as foreshadowing of clay animation.\n\nIn 1905, Porter showed animated letters and very simple cutout animation of two hands in the intertitles in How Jones Lost His Roll . \n\nPorter experimented with a small bit of crude stop-motion animation in his trick film Dream of a Rarebit Fiend (1906).\n\nThe \"Teddy\" Bears (2 March 1907), made in collaboration with Wallace McCutcheon Sr. , mainly shows people in bear costumes, but the short film also features a short stop-motion segment with small teddy bears. \n\nOn 15 February 1908, Porter released the trick film A Sculptor's Welsh Rabbit Dream that featured clay molding itself into three complete busts. No copy of the film has yet been located. It was soon followed by the similar extant film The Sculptor's Nightmare (6 May 1908) by Wallace McCutcheon Sr. \n\nJ. Stuart Blackton 's The Haunted Hotel (23 February 1907) featured a combination of live-action with practical special effects and stop motion animation of several objects, a puppet and a model of the haunted hotel. It was the first stop motion film to receive wide scale appreciation. Especially a large close-up view of a table being set by itself baffled viewers; there were no visible wires or other noticeable well-known tricks. This inspired other filmmakers, including French animator Émile Cohl and Segundo de Chomón. De Chomón would release the similar The House of Ghosts ( La maison ensorcelée ) and Hôtel électrique in 1908, with the latter also containing some very early pixelation.\n\nThe Humpty Dumpty Circus (1908, considered lost) by Blackton and his British-American Vitagraph partner Albert E. Smith showed an animated performance of figures from a popular wooden toy set. Smith would later claim that this was \"the first stop-motion picture in America\". The inspiration would have come from seeing how puffs of smoke behaved in the interrupted recordings for a stop trick film they were making. Smith would have suggested to get a patent for the technique, but Blackton thought it wasn't that important. Smith's recollections are not considered to be very reliable. \n\nBlackton's The Haunted Hotel made a big impression in Paris, where it was released as L'hôtel hanté: fantasmagorie épouvantable . When Gaumont bought a copy to further distribute the film, it was carefully studied by some of their filmmakers to find out how it was made. Reportedly it was newcomer Émile Cohl who unraveled the mystery. Not long after, Cohl released his first film, Japon de fantaisie (June 1907), featuring his own imaginative use of the stop-motion technique.\nIt was followed by the revolutionary hand-drawn Fantasmagorie (17 August 1908) and many more animated films by Cohl.\n\nOther notable stop-motion films by Cohl include Les allumettes animées (Animated Matches) (1908), and Mobilier fidèle (1910, in collaboration with Romeo Bosetti ). Mobilier fidèle is often confused with Bosetti's object animation tour de force Le garde-meubles automatique (The Automatic Moving Company) (1912). Both films feature furniture moving by itself.\n\nOf the more than 300 short films produced between 1896 and 1915 by British film pioneer Arthur Melbourne-Cooper , an estimated 36 contained forms of animation. Based on later reports by Melbourne-Cooper and by his daughter Audrey Wadowska, some believe that Cooper's Matches: an Appeal was produced in 1899 and therefore the first stop-motion animation. The extant black-and-white film shows a matchstick figure writing an appeal to donate a Guinea for which Bryant & May would supply soldiers with sufficient matches. No archival records are known that could proof that the film was indeed created in 1899 during the beginning of the Second Boer War . Others place it at 1914, during the beginning of World War I . Cooper created more Animated Matches scenes in the same setting. These are believed to also have been produced in 1899, while a release date of 1908 has also been given. The 1908 Animated Matches film by Émile Cohl may have caused more confusion about the release dates of Cooper's matchstick animations. It also raises the question whether Cohl may have been inspired by Melbourne-Cooper or vice versa.\n\nMelbourne-Cooper's lost films Dolly’s Toys (1901) and The Enchanted Toymaker (1904) may have included stop-motion animation. Dreams of Toyland (1908) features a scene with many animated toys that lasts approximately three and a half minutes.\n\nAs a means to plan his performances, ballet dancer and choreographer Alexander Shiryaev started making approximately 20- to 25-centimeter-tall puppets out of papier-mâché on poseable wire frames. He then sketched all the sequential movements on paper. When he arranged these vertically on a long strip, it was possible to give a presentation of the complete dance with a home cinema projector. Later on, he bought a movie camera and between 1906 and 1909 he made many short films, including puppet animations. As a dancer and choreographer, Shiryaev had a special talent to create motion in his animated films. According to animator Peter Lord his work was decades ahead of its time. Part of Shiryaev's animation work is featured in Viktor Bocharov's documentary Alexander Shiryaev: A Belated Premiere (2003). \n\nPolish-Russian Ladislas Starevich (1882–1965), started his film career around 1909 in Kaunas filming live insects. He wanted to document rutting stag beetles , but the creatures wouldn't cooperate or would even die under the bright lamps needed for filming. He solved the problem by using wire for the limbs of dried beetles and then animating them in stop motion. The resulting short film, presumably 1 minute long, was probably titled by the Latin name for the species: Lucanus Cervus (Жук-олень, 1910, considered lost).\n\nAfter moving to Moscow, Starevich continued animating dead insects, but now as characters in imaginative stories with much dramatic complexity. He garnered much attention and international acclaim with these short films, including the 10-minute The Beautiful Leukanida (Прекрасная Люканида, или Война усачей с рогачами) (March 1912), the two-minute Happy Scenes from Animal Life (Веселые сценки из жизни животных), the 12-minute The Cameraman's Revenge (Прекрасная Люканида, или Война усачей с рогачами, October 1912) and the 5-minute The Grasshopper and the Ant (Стрекоза и муравей, 1913). Reportedly many viewers were impressed with how much could be achieved with trained insects, or at least wondered what tricks could have been used, since few people were familiar with the secrets of stop motion animation. The Insects' Christmas (Рождество обитателей леса, 1913) featured other animated puppets, including Father Christmas and a frog. Starevich made several other stop motion films in the next two years, but mainly went on to direct live-action short and feature films before he fled from Russia in 1918.\n\nWillis O' Brien 's first stop motion film was The Dinosaur and the Missing Link: A Prehistoric Tragedy (1915). Apart from the titular dinosaur and \" missing link \" ape, it featured several cavemen and an ostrich-like \"desert quail\", all relatively lifelike models made with clay. This led to a series of short animated comedies with a prehistoric theme for Edison Company, including Prehistoric Poultry (1916), R.F.D. 10,000 B.C. (1917), The Birth of a Flivver (1917) and Curious Pets of Our Ancestors (1917). O'Brien was then hired by producer Herbert M. Dawley to direct, create effects, co-write and co-star with him for The Ghost of Slumber Mountain (1918). The collaborative film combined live-action with animated dinosaur models in a 45-minute film, but after the premiere it was cut down to approximately 12 minutes. Dawley did not give O'Brien credits for the visual effects, and instead claimed the animation process as his own invention and even applied for patents. O'Brien's stop motion work was recognized as a technique to create lifelike creatures for adventure films. O' Brien further pioneered the technique with animated dinosaur sequences for the live-action feature The Lost World (1925).\n\nNew York artist Helena Smith Dayton , possibly the first female animator, had much success with her \"Caricatypes\" clay statuettes before she began experimenting with clay animation. Some of her first resulting short films were screened on 25 March 1917. She released an adaptation of William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet approximately half a year later. Although the films and her technique received much attention of the press, it seems she did not continue making films after she returned to New York from managing a YMCA in Paris around 1918. None of her films have yet surfaced, but the extant magazine articles have provided several stills and approximately 20 poorly printed frames from two film strips. \n\nBy 1920 Starewicz had settled in Paris, and started making new stop motion films. Dans les Griffes de L'araignée (finished 1920, released 1924) featured detailed hand-made insect puppets that could convey facial expressions with moving lips and eyelids.\n\nOne of the earliest clay animation films was Modelling Extraordinary , which impressed audiences in 1912. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe early Italian feature film Cabiria (1914) featured some stop motion techniques. [ citation needed ]\n\nStarewicz finished the first feature stop motion film Le Roman de Renard (The Tale of the Fox) in 1930, but problems with its soundtrack delayed its release. In 1937 it was released with a German soundtrack and in 1941 with its French soundtrack.\n\nHungarian-American filmmaker George Pal developed his own stop motion technique of replacing wooden dolls (or parts of them) with similar figures displaying changed poses and/or expressions. He called it Pal-Doll and used it for his Puppetoons films since 1932. The particular replacement animation method itself also became better known as puppetoon . In Europe he mainly worked on promotional films for companies such as Philips . Later Pal gained much success in Hollywood with a string of Academy Award for Best Animated Short Films , including Rhythm in the Ranks (1941), Tulips Shall Grow (1942), Jasper and the Haunted House (1942), the Dr. Seuss penned The 500 Hats of Bartholomew Cubbins (1943) and And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street (1944), Jasper and the Beanstalk (1945), John Henry and the Inky-Poo (1946), Jasper in a Jam (1946), and Tubby the Tuba (1947). Many of his puppetoon films were selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry .\n\nWillis O' Brien's expressive and emotionally convincing animation of the big ape in King Kong (1933) is widely regarded as a milestone in stop-motion animation and a highlight of Hollywood cinema in general.\n\nA 1940 promotional film for Autolite , an automotive parts supplier, featured stop-motion animation of its products marching past Autolite factories to the tune of Franz Schubert 's Military March . An abbreviated version of this sequence was later used in television ads for Autolite, especially those on the 1950s CBS program Suspense , which Autolite sponsored.\n\nThe first British animated feature was the stop motion instruction film Handling Ships (1945) by Halas and Batchelor for the British Admiralty . It was not meant for general cinemas, but did become part of the official selection of the 1946 Cannes Film Festival .\n\nThe first Belgian animated feature was an adaptation of the Tintin comic The Crab with the Golden Claws (1947) with animated puppets.\n\nThe first Czech animated feature was the package film The Czech Year (1947) with animated puppets by Jiří Trnka . The film won several awards at the Venice Film Festival and other international festivals. Trnka would make several more award-winning stop motion features including The Emperor's Nightingale (1949), Prince Bayaya (1950), Old Czech Legends (1953), or A Midsummer Night's Dream (1959). He also directed many short films and experimented with other forms of animation.\n\nRay Harryhausen learned under O'Brien on the film Mighty Joe Young (1949). Harryhausen would go on to create many memorable stop motion effects for a string of successful fantasy films over the next three decades. These included The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms (1953), It Came from Beneath the Sea (1955), Jason and the Argonauts (1963), The Golden Voyage of Sinbad (1973), and Clash of the Titans (1981).\n\nIt wasn't until 1954 before a feature animated film with a technique other than cel animation was produced in the US. The first was the stop motion adaptation of 19th century composer Engelbert Humperdinck 's opera Hänsel und Gretel as Hansel and Gretel: An Opera Fantasy .\n\nIn 1955, Karel Zeman made his first feature film Journey to the Beginning of Time inspired by Jules Verne , featuring stop motion animation of dinosaurs and other prehistoric creatures.\n\nArt Clokey started his adventures in clay with a freeform clay short film called Gumbasia (1955), which shortly thereafter propelled him into the production of his more structured TV series Gumby (1955–1989), with the iconic titular character. In partnership with the United Lutheran Church in America , he also produced Davey and Goliath (1960–2004). The theatrical feature Gumby: The Movie (1992, released in 1995) was a box-office bomb .\n\nOn 22 November 1959, the first episode of Unser Sandmänchen (Our Little Sandman) was broadcast on DFF (East German television) . The 10-minute daily bedtime show for young children features the title character as an animated puppet, and other puppets in different segments. A very similar Sandmänchen series, possibly conceived earlier, ran on West German television from 1 December 1959 until the German reunification in 1989. The East German show was continued on other German networks when DFF ended in 1991, and is one of the longest running animated series in the world. [ citation needed ] The theatrical feature Das Sandmännchen – Abenteuer im Traumland (2010) was fully animated with stop motion puppets.\n\nJapanese puppet animator Tadahito Mochinaga started out as assistant animator in short anime (propaganda) films Arichan (1941) and Momotarō no Umiwashi (1943). He fled to Manchukuo during the war and stayed in China afterwards. Due to the scarcity of paint and film stock shortly after the war, Mochinaga decided to work with puppets and stop motion. His work helped popularize puppet animation in China, before he returned to Japan around 1953 where he continued working as animation director. In the 1960s, Mochinaga supervised the \"Animagic\" puppet animation for productions by Arthur Rankin Jr. and Jules Bass ' Videocraft International, Ltd. (later called Rankin/Bass Productions , Inc.) and Dentsu , starting with the syndicated television series The New Adventures of Pinocchio (1960-1961). The Christmas TV special Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer has been telecasted annually since 1964 and has become one of the most beloved holiday specials in the United States. They made three theatrical feature films Willy McBean and His Magic Machine (1965), The Daydreamer (1966, stop motion / live-action) and Mad Monster Party? (1966, released in 1967), and the television special Ballad of Smokey the Bear (1966) before the collaboration ended. Rankin/Bass worked with other animators for more TV specials, with titles such as The Little Drummer Boy (1968), Santa Claus is Comin' to Town (1970) and Here Comes Peter Cottontail (1971).\n\nBritish television has shown many stop motion series for young children since the 1960s. An early example is Snip and Snap (1960-1961) by John Halas in collaboration with Danish paper sculptor Thok Søndergaard (Thoki Yenn), featuring dog Snap, cut from a sheet of paper by pair of scissors Snip.\n\nApart from their cutout animation series, British studio Smallfilms ( Peter Firmin and Oliver Postgate ) produced several stop motion series with puppets, beginning with Pingwings (1961-1965) featuring penguin-like birds knitted by Peter's wife Joan and filmed on their farm (where most of their productions were filmed in an unused barn). It was followed by Pogles' Wood (1965-1967), Clangers (1969-1972, 1974, revived in 2015), Bagpuss (1974) and Tottie: The Story of a Doll's House (1984).\n\nCzech surrealist filmmaker Jan Švankmajer 's released his short artistic films since 1964, which usually contain much experimental stop motion. He started to gain much international recognition in the 1980s. Since 1988 he has mostly been directing feature films which feature much more live action than stop motion. These include Alice , an adaptation of Lewis Carroll 's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland , and Faust , a rendition of the legend of the German scholar . Švankmajer's work has been highly influential on other artists, such as Terry Gilliam and the Quay brothers (although the latter claim to have only discovered Švankmajer's films after having developed their own similar style).\n\nFrench animator Serge Danot created The Magic Roundabout (1965) which played for many years on the BBC .\n\nPolish studio Se-ma-for produced popular TV series with animated puppets in adaptations of Colargol ( Barnaby the Bear in the UK, Jeremy in Canada) (1967-1974) and The Moomins (1977-1982).\n\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, independent clay animator Eliot Noyes Jr. refined the technique of \"free-form\" clay animation with his Oscar-nominated 1965 film Clay (or the Origin of Species) . Noyes also used stop motion to animate sand lying on glass for his musical animated film Sandman (1975).\n\nItalian director Francesco Misseri created the clay animation TV series Mio Mao (1970-1976, 2002–2007), The Red and the Blue ( Il Rosso e il Blu , 1976), and a TV series with an animated origami duck Quaq Quao (1978-1979).\n\nThe British artists Brian Cosgrove and Mark Hall ( Cosgrove Hall Films ) produced two stop-motion animated adaptions of Enid Blyton 's Noddy book series, including the original series of the same name (1975–1982) and Noddy's Toyland Adventures (1992–2001), a full-length film The Wind in the Willows (1983) and later a multi-season TV series , both based on Kenneth Grahame 's classic children's book of the same title. They also produced a documentary of their production techniques, Making Frog and Toad .\n\nIn 1975, filmmaker and clay animation experimenter Will Vinton joined with sculptor Bob Gardiner to create an experimental film called Closed Mondays which became the first stop-motion film to win an Oscar. Will Vinton followed with several other successful short film experiments including The Great Cognito , The Creation , and Rip Van Winkle which were each nominated for Academy Awards. In 1977, Vinton made a documentary about this process and his style of animation which he dubbed \"claymation\"; he titled the documentary Claymation . Soon after this documentary, the term was trademarked by Vinton to differentiate his team's work from others who had been, or were beginning to do, \"clay animation\". While the word has stuck and is often used to describe clay animation and stop motion, it remains a trademark owned currently by Laika Entertainment, Inc. Twenty clay-animation episodes featuring the clown Mr. Bill were a feature of Saturday Night Live , starting from a first appearance in February 1976.\n\nAt very much the same time in the UK, Peter Lord and David Sproxton formed Aardman Animations that would produce many commercials, TV series, short films and eventually also feature films. In 1976 they created the character Morph who appeared as an animated side-kick to the TV presenter Tony Hart on his BBC TV programme Take Hart . The five-inch-high presenter was made from a traditional British modelling clay called Plasticine . In 1977 they started on a series of animated films, again using modelling clay, but this time made for a more adult audience. The soundtrack for Down and Out was recorded in a Salvation Army Hostel and Plasticine puppets were animated to dramatise the dialogue. A second film, also for the BBC followed in 1978. A TV series The Amazing Adventures of Morph was aired in 1980.\n\nSand-coated puppet animation was used in the Oscar-winning 1977 film The Sand Castle , produced by Dutch-Canadian animator Co Hoedeman . Hoedeman was one of dozens of animators sheltered by the National Film Board of Canada , a Canadian government film arts agency that had supported animators for decades. A pioneer of refined multiple stop-motion films under the NFB banner was Norman McLaren , who brought in many other animators to create their own creatively controlled films. Notable among these are the pinscreen animation films of Jacques Drouin, made with the original pinscreen donated by Alexandre Alexeieff and Claire Parker .\n\nCzech filmmakers Lubomír Beneš and Vladimír Jiránek debuted their animated puppet characters Pat & Mat , two inventive but clumsy neighbors, in the 7-minute short Kuťáci in 1976. Since 1979, over 100 episodes have been broadcast irregularly. Since 2014, new episodes were presented in theatrically released package films. The series became very popular in several countries, especially in The Netherlands, the only country where the characters are voiced.\n\nOne of the main British animation teams, John Hardwick and Bob Bura , were the main animators in many early British TV shows, and are famous for their work on the Trumptonshire trilogy ( Camberwick Green , Trumpton and Chigley ). Their company was named Stop Motion Limited, the term having been their trademark until it became generic . \n\nDisney experimented with several stop-motion techniques by hiring independent animator-director Mike Jittlov to make the first stop-motion animation of Mickey Mouse toys ever produced, in a short sequence called Mouse Mania , part of a TV special, Mickey's 50 , which commemorated Mickey's 50th anniversary in 1978. Jittlov again produced some impressive multi-technique stop-motion animation a year later for a 1979 Disney special promoting their release of the feature film The Black Hole . Titled Major Effects , Jittlov's work stood out as the best part of the special. Jittlov released his footage the following year to 16mm film collectors as a short film titled The Wizard of Speed and Time , along with four of his other short multi-technique animated films, most of which eventually evolved into his own feature-length film of the same title. Effectively demonstrating almost all animation techniques, as well as how he produced them, the film was released to theaters in 1987 and to video in 1989.\n\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, Industrial Light & Magic often used stop-motion model animation in such films as the original Star Wars trilogy : the holochess sequence in Star Wars , the Tauntauns and AT-AT walkers in The Empire Strikes Back , and the AT-ST walkers in Return of the Jedi were all filmed using stop-motion animation, with the latter two films utilising go motion : an invention from renowned visual effects veteran Phil Tippett . The many shots including the ghosts in Raiders of the Lost Ark , the Dragon in Dragonslayer , and the first two feature films in the RoboCop series use Tippett's go motion.\n\nIn the UK, Aardman Animations continued to grow. Channel 4 funded a new series of clay animated films, Conversation Pieces , using recorded soundtracks of real people talking. A further series in 1986, called Lip Sync , premiered the work of Richard Goleszowski ( Ident ), Barry Purves ( Next ), and Nick Park ( Creature Comforts ), as well as further films by Sproxton and Lord. Creature Comforts won the Oscar for Best Animated Short in 1990. In 1986, they also produced a notable music video for \"Sledgehammer\" , a song by Peter Gabriel .\n\nIn 1980, Marc Paul Chinoy directed the 1st feature-length clay animated film, based on the famous Pogo comic strip. Titled I go Pogo . It was aired a few times on American cable channels but has yet to be commercially released. Primarily clay, some characters required armatures, and walk cycles used pre-sculpted hard bases legs. \n\nStop motion was also used for some shots of the final sequence of the first Terminator movie, also for the scenes of the small alien ships in Spielberg 's Batteries Not Included in 1987, animated by David W. Allen . Allen's stop-motion work can also be seen in such feature films as The Crater Lake Monster (1977), Q - The Winged Serpent (1982), The Gate (1987) and Freaked (1993). Allen's King Kong Volkswagen commercial from the 1970s is now legendary among model animation enthusiasts.\n\nIn 1985, Will Vinton and his team released an ambitious feature film in stop motion called \" The Adventures Of Mark Twain \" based on the life and works of the famous American author. While the film may have been a little sophisticated for young audiences at the time, it got rave reviews from critics and adults in general. [ citation needed ] Vinton's team also created the Nomes and the Nome King for Disney's \" Return to Oz \" feature, for which they received an Academy Award Nomination for Special Visual Effects . In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Will Vinton became very well known for his commercial work as well with stop-motion campaigns including The California Raisins and The Noid .\n\nJiří Barta released his award-winning fantasy film The Pied Piper (1986).\n\nFrom 1986 to 1991, Churchill Films produced The Mouse and the Motorcycle , Runaway Ralph , and Ralph S. Mouse for ABC television. The shows featured stop-motion characters combined with live action, based on the books of Beverly Cleary. John Clark Matthews was the animation director, with Justin Kohn, Joel Fletcher, and Gail Van Der Merwe providing character animation. The company also produced other films based on children's books.\n\nFrom 1986 to 2000, over 150 five-minute episodes of Pingu , a Swiss children's comedy , were produced by Trickfilmstudio.\n\nAardman Animations' Nick Park became very successful with his short claymation Creature Comforts in 1989, which had talking animals voicing vox pop interviews. Park then used the same format to produce a series of commercials between 1990 and 1992. The commercials have been credited as having introduced a more \"caring\" way of advertising in the UK. Richard Goleszowski later directed two 13-episode Creature Comforts TV series (2003, 2005–2006) and a Christmas special (2005). Also in 1989, Park introduced his very popular clay characters Wallace and Gromit in A Grand Day Out . Three more short films and one feature film and many TV adaptions and spin-offs would follow. Among many other awards, Park won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature for the feature-length outing Wallace & Gromit: The Curse of the Were-Rabbit . Park also worked on the Chicken Run movie, which was another film from Aardman Animations.\n\nIn 1992, Trey Parker and Matt Stone made The Spirit of Christmas , a short cutout animated student film made with construction paper . In 1995 they made a second short with the same titled, commissioned as a Christmas greeting by Fox Broadcasting Company executive Brian Graden . The concepts and characters were further developed into the TV hit series South Park (since 1997). Except for the pilot, all animation has been created on computers in the same style.\n\nThe Nightmare Before Christmas (1993), directed by Henry Selick and produced by Tim Burton , was one of the more widely released stop-motion features and became the highest grossing stop-motion animated movie of its time, grossing over $50 million domestic. Henry Selick also went on to direct James and the Giant Peach and Coraline , and Tim Burton went on to direct Corpse Bride and Frankenweenie .\n\nThe stop-motion feature The Secret Adventures of Tom Thumb was released in 1993.\n\nIn November 1998, the first episode of Bob the Builder released on BBC. Bob the Builder was a popular British stop-motion television series created by Keith Chapman & produced and owned by HIT Entertainment .\n\nIn 1999, Will Vinton launched the first US prime-time stop-motion television series called The PJs , co-created by actor-comedian Eddie Murphy . The Emmy-winning sitcom aired on Fox for two seasons, then moved to the WB for an additional season. Vinton launched another series, Gary & Mike , for UPN in 2001.\n\nIn 1999, Tsuneo Gōda directed 30-second sketches of the character Domo . The shorts, animated by stop-motion studio Dwarf, are currently still produced in Japan and have received universal critical acclaim from fans and critics. Gōda also directed the stop-motion movie series Komaneko in 2004.\n\nThe BBC commissioned thirteen episodes of stop frame animated Summerton Mill in 2004 as inserts into their flagship pre-school program, Tikkabilla . Created and produced by Pete Bryden and Ed Cookson, the series was then given its own slot on BBC1 and BBC2 and has been broadcast extensively around the world.\n\nOther notable stop-motion feature films released since 2000 include Fantastic Mr. Fox (2009), $9.99 (2009), Anomalisa (2015), Henry Selick's Wendell and Wild (2022) and Guillermo del Toro's Pinocchio (2022).\n\nIn 2003, the pilot film for the series Curucuru and Friends , produced by Korean studio Ffango Entertoyment is greenlighted into a children's animated series in 2004 after an approval with the Gyeonggi Digital Contents Agency. It was aired in KBS1 on November 24, 2006, and won the 13th Korean Animation Awards in 2007 for Best Animation. Ffango Entertoyment also worked with Frontier Works in Japan to produce the 2010 film remake of Cheburashka . \n\nSince 2005, Robot Chicken has mostly utilized stop-motion animation, using custom made action figures and other toys as principal characters.\n\nSince 2009, Laika , the stop-motion successor to Will Vinton Studios , has released five feature films , which have collectively grossed over $400 million: Coraline (2009), ParaNorman (2012), The Boxtrolls (2014), Kubo and the Two Strings (2016) and Missing Link (2019).\n\nDirectors like Tim Burton and Wes Anderson are still using stop-motion animation in some of their live action films. \n\nIn November 2024, Disney released Mickey & Minnie's Christmas Carols , a series of five stop-motion shorts featuring Mickey, Minnie, Donald, Daisy, Goofy and Pluto.\n\nStop motion has very rarely been shot in stereoscopic 3D throughout film history. The first 3D stop-motion short was In Tune With Tomorrow (also known as Motor Rhythm ), made in 1939 by John Norling. The second stereoscopic stop-motion release was The Adventures of Sam Space in 1955 by Paul Sprunck. The third and latest stop motion short in stereo 3D was The Incredible Invasion of the 20,000 Giant Robots from Outer Space in 2000 by Elmer Kaan and Alexander Lentjes. This is also the first ever 3D stereoscopic stop motion and CGI short in the history of film. The first all stop-motion 3D feature is Coraline (2009), based on Neil Gaiman 's best-selling novel and directed by Henry Selick.\nAnother recent example is the Nintendo 3DS video software which comes with the option for Stop Motion videos. This has been released December 8, 2011 as a 3DS system update. Also, the film ParaNorman is in 3D stop motion.\n\nAnother more complicated variation on stop motion is go motion , co-developed by Phil Tippett and first used on the films The Empire Strikes Back (1980), Dragonslayer (1981), and the RoboCop films. Go motion involved programming a computer to move parts of a model slightly during each exposure of each frame of film, combined with traditional hand manipulation of the model in between frames, to produce a more realistic motion blurring effect. Tippett also used the process extensively in his 1984 short film Prehistoric Beast , a 10 minutes long sequence depicting a herbivorous dinosaur ( Monoclonius ), being chased by a carnivorous one ( Tyrannosaurus ). With new footage Prehistoric Beast became Dinosaur! in 1985, a full-length dinosaurs documentary hosted by Christopher Reeve . Those Phil Tippett's go motion tests acted as motion models for his first photo-realistic use of computers to depict dinosaurs in Jurassic Park in 1993. A low-tech, manual version of this blurring technique was originally pioneered by Władysław Starewicz in the silent era, and was used in his feature film The Tale of the Fox (1931).\n\nThe reasons for using stop motion instead of the more advanced computer-generated imagery (CGI) include the appeal of its distinct look and the notion that it accurately displays real-life textures, while CGI texturing can look more artificial and isn't always quite as close to realism. This is appreciated by a number of animation directors, such as Guillermo del Toro , Henry Selick , Tim Burton and Travis Knight . \n\nGuillermo del Toro aimed to praise the benefits of stop motion in his movie Pinocchio , saying that he wanted \"the expressiveness and the material nature of a handmade piece of animation — an artisanal, beautiful exercise in carving, painting, sculpting\". \n\nMany young people begin their experiments in movie making with stop motion, thanks to the ease of modern stop-motion software and online video publishing. Many new stop-motion shorts use clay animation into a new form. \n\nSinger-songwriter Oren Lavie 's music video for the song Her Morning Elegance was posted on YouTube on January 19, 2009. The video, directed by Lavie and Yuval and Merav Nathan, uses stop motion and has achieved great success with over 25.4 million views, also earning a 2010 Grammy Award nomination for \"Best Short Form Music Video\".\n\nStop motion has occasionally been used to create the characters for computer games , as an alternative to CGI. The Virgin Interactive Entertainment Mythos game Magic and Mayhem (1998) featured creatures built by stop-motion specialist Alan Friswell, who made the miniature figures from modelling clay and latex rubber, over armatures of wire and ball-and-socket joints. The models were then animated one frame at a time, and incorporated into the CGI elements of the game through digital photography. \" ClayFighter \" for the Super NES and The Neverhood and Hylics 2 for the PC are other examples.\n\nScientists at IBM used a scanning tunneling microscope to single out and move individual atoms which were used to make characters in A Boy and His Atom . This was the tiniest scale stop-motion video made at that time. \n\nReplicating the distinct tactile look of traditional stop motion has gained popularity in contemporary media through the use of CGI. This approach can often provide a more cost-effective and accessible means of achieving the stop motion aesthetic. Noteworthy among such endeavors is the work of Blender animator Ian Worthington, exemplified by his 2021 short film \"Captain Yajima\". Another prominent example of this trend includes The LEGO Movie , which uses CGI to replicate the visual style and imperfections of stop motion. ",
  "Strawberry Field is a visitor attraction and training centre in the Liverpool suburb of Woolton that is owned and operated by the Salvation Army . It operated as a children's home between 1936 and 2005. The house and grounds had originally been built as a private residence in the Victorian era , before being acquired by the Salvation Army in the 1930s. The house was demolished in 1973 due to structural problems and replaced with purpose-built units. After being closed as a children's home, the site has continued to be used by the Salvation Army for other purposes.\n\nThe location gained worldwide fame following the release of the Beatles ' 1967 single \" Strawberry Fields Forever \". The song's writer, John Lennon , had grown up nearby and played in the grounds of the home as a child. In time, the old red-painted entrance gates on Beaconsfield Road became a place of pilgrimage for Beatles fans. In 2019, Strawberry Field was opened to the public for the first time, with an exhibition on its history, cafe, and shop, alongside a training centre for young people with special educational needs .\n\nThe gates were stolen on 11 May 2000, allegedly by two men in a transit van . The gates were sold to an unsuspecting antiques dealer who never realised they were the actual gates from Strawberry Field. He returned them to the police upon request, and they now stand in the grounds of Strawberry Field.\n\nThe earliest reference to the Gothic Revival mansion Strawberry Field dates from 1870, when it was owned by wealthy shipping magnate George Warren. On an 1891 Ordnance Survey map, the building and its grounds appear as the plural Strawberry Fields, although this had changed by the 1905 survey. In 1912, it was transferred to another wealthy merchant whose widow sold the estate to the Salvation Army in 1934. It was opened as a children's home on 7 July 1936 by Lady Bates in the presence of General Evangeline Booth , daughter of Salvation Army founders William Booth and Catherine Booth . It initially housed up to 40 girls; boys under the age of five were introduced in the 1950s. Later, older boys also became resident.\n\nThe name of the home became famous in 1967 with the release of the Beatles ' single \" Strawberry Fields Forever \", written by John Lennon , who had grown up at nearby 251 Menlove Avenue . Beaconsfield Road, where Strawberry Field is located, is a side street from Menlove Avenue. One of Lennon's childhood treats was the garden party that took place each summer, on the grounds of Strawberry Field. Lennon's Aunt Mimi recalled, \"As soon as we could hear the Salvation Army Band starting, John would jump up and down shouting, 'Mimi, come on. We're going to be late.'\" \n\nStrawberry Field was recognised by Nikolaus Pevsner in his 1969 survey of the buildings of South Lancashire . However, by then, the building was increasingly unfit for purpose. By 1973, structural problems such as dry rot meant that it was more cost-effective to demolish the building and replace it with a purpose-built children's home. This new home provided three family units, each accommodating 12 children. The driveway entrance to the building was moved further west along Beaconsfield Road so the gateposts bearing the name of Strawberry Field were no longer used. Throughout the 1970s and beyond, the disused entrance and its gates became a mecca for Beatles fans from around the world. As a result, the gates continued to be painted bright red; the painted nameplates were also maintained.\n\nThe children's home closed in January 2005, and the building was used by the Salvation Army as a church and prayer centre. The famous gates marking its entrance were removed and replaced with replicas in May 2011. The Salvation Army opened Strawberry Field to the public for the first time in September 2019, allowing visitors to explore the grounds. Incorporated in the grounds is a training centre for young people with special educational needs and a new exhibition space dedicated to the story of the place, together with a cafe and shop. \n\n53°22′49″N 2°53′2″W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.38028°N 2.88389°W ﻿ / 53.38028; -2.88389",
  "A ball is a round object (usually spherical , but can sometimes be ovoid ) with several uses. It is used in ball games , where the play of the game follows the state of the ball as it is hit, kicked or thrown by players. Balls can also be used for simpler activities, such as catch or juggling . Balls made from hard-wearing materials are used in engineering applications to provide very low friction bearings, known as ball bearings . Black-powder weapons use stone and metal balls as projectiles .\n\nAlthough many types of balls are today made from rubber , this form was unknown outside the Americas until after the voyages of Columbus . The Spanish were the first Europeans to see the bouncing rubber balls (although solid and not inflated) which were employed most notably in the Mesoamerican ballgame . Balls used in various sports in other parts of the world prior to Columbus were made from other materials such as animal bladders or skins, stuffed with various materials.\n\nAs balls are one of the most familiar spherical objects to humans, the word \"ball\" may refer to or describe spherical or near-spherical objects.\n\n\"Ball\" is used metaphorically sometimes to denote something spherical or spheroid, e.g., armadillos and human beings curl up into a ball, or making a fist into a ball.\n\nThe first known use of the word ball in English in the sense of a globular body that is played with was in 1205 in Layamon's Brut, or Chronicle of Britain in the phrase, \" Summe heo driuen balles wide ȝeond Þa feldes. \" (\"Some of them drove balls far across the fields.\") The word came from the Middle English bal (inflected as ball-e, -es ), in turn from Old Norse böllr (pronounced [bɔlːr] ; compare Old Swedish baller , and Swedish boll ) from Proto-Germanic ballu-z (whence probably Middle High German bal, ball-es , Middle Dutch bal ), a cognate with Old High German ballo, pallo , Middle High German balle from Proto-Germanic *ballon (weak masculine), and Old High German ballâ, pallâ , Middle High German balle , Proto-Germanic *ballôn (weak feminine). No Old English representative of any of these is known. (The answering forms in Old English would have been beallu, -a, -e —compare bealluc, ballock .) If ball- was native in Germanic, it may have been a cognate with the Latin foll-is in sense of a \"thing blown up or inflated.\" In the later Middle English spelling balle the word coincided graphically with the French balle \"ball\" and \"bale\" which has hence been erroneously assumed to be its source. French balle (but not boule ) is assumed to be of Germanic origin, itself, however. In Ancient Greek the word πάλλα ( palla ) for \"ball\" is attested besides the word σφαίρα ( sfaíra ), sphere . \n\nSome form of game with a ball is found portrayed on Egyptian monuments. In Homer , Nausicaa was playing at ball with her maidens when Odysseus first saw her in the land of the Phaeacians (Od. vi. 100). And Halios and Laodamas performed before Alcinous and Odysseus with ball play, accompanied with dancing (Od. viii. 370). The most ancient balls in Eurasia have been discovered in Karasahr , China and are 3000 years old. They were made of hair-filled leather. \n\nAmong the ancient Greeks , games with balls (σφαῖραι) were regarded as a useful subsidiary to the more violent athletic exercises, as a means of keeping the body supple, and rendering it graceful, but were generally left to boys and girls. Of regular rules for the playing of ball games, little trace remains, if there were any such. The names in Greek for various forms, which have come down to us in such works as the Ὀνομαστικόν of Julius Pollux , imply little or nothing of such; thus, ἀπόρραξις ( aporraxis ) only means the putting of the ball on the ground with the open hand, οὐρανία ( ourania ), the flinging of the ball in the air to be caught by two or more players; φαινίνδα ( phaininda ) would seem to be a game of catch played by two or more, where feinting is used as a test of quickness and skill. Pollux (i. x. 104) mentions a game called episkyros (ἐπίσκυρος), which has often been looked on as the origin of football. It seems to have been played by two sides, arranged in lines; how far there was any form of \"goal\" seems uncertain. It was impossible to produce a ball that was perfectly spherical; children usually made their own balls by inflating pig's bladders and heating them in the ashes of a fire to make them rounder, although Plato (fl. 420s BC – 340s BC) described \"balls which have leather coverings in twelve pieces\". \n\nAmong the Romans , ball games were looked upon as an adjunct to the bath, and were graduated to the age and health of the bathers, and usually a place (sphaeristerium) was set apart for them in the baths (thermae). There appear to have been three types or sizes of ball, the pila, or small ball, used in catching games, the paganica, a heavy ball stuffed with feathers, and the follis , a leather ball filled with air, the largest of the three. This was struck from player to player, who wore a kind of gauntlet on the arm. There was a game known as trigon , played by three players standing in the form of a triangle, and played with the follis, and also one known as harpastum , which seems to imply a \"scrimmage\" among several players for the ball. These games are known to us through the Romans, though the names are Greek. \n\nThe various modern games played with a ball or balls and subject to rules are treated under their various names, such as polo , cricket , football , etc. \n\nIn sports , many modern balls are pressurized. Some are pressurized at the factory (e.g. tennis , squash (sport) ) and others are pressurized by users (e.g. volleyball , basketball , football ). Almost all pressurized balls gradually leak air. If the ball is factory pressurized, there is usually a rule about whether the ball retains sufficient pressure to remain playable. Depressurized balls lack bounce and are often termed \"dead\". In extreme cases, a dead ball becomes flaccid. If the ball is pressured on use, there are generally rules about how the ball is pressurized before the match, and when (or whether) the ball can be repressurized or replaced.\n\nDue to the ideal gas law , ball pressure is a function of temperature, generally tracking ambient conditions. Softer balls that are struck hard (especially squash balls) increase in temperature due to inelastic collision .\n\nIn outdoor sports, wet balls play differently than dry balls. In indoor sports, balls may become damp due to hand sweat. Any form of humidity or dampness will affect a ball's surface friction, which will alter a player's ability to impart spin on the ball. The action required to apply spin to a ball is governed by the physics of angular momentum . Spinning balls travelling through air (technically a fluid ) will experience the Magnus effect , which can produce lateral deflections in addition to the normal up-down curvature induced by a combination of wind resistance and gravity .\n\ncentimeters\n\n21–21.25 inches (53.3–54.0 cm) (transversal)\n\n20.75–21.375 inches (52.71–54.29 cm) (transversal)\n\n6.25–6.75 inches (15.9–17.1 cm) (transversal)\n\n54.5 -55.5 cm (circular)\n\n58 - 62 centimeters (circular)",
  "Empirical methods\n\nPrescriptive and policy\n\nAdam Smith (baptised 16 June [ O.S. 5 June] 1723 – 17 July 1790) was a Scottish [ a ] economist and philosopher who was a pioneer in the thinking of political economy and key figure during the Scottish Enlightenment . Seen by some as the \"father of economics\" or the \"father of capitalism \", he wrote two classic works, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) and An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). The latter, often abbreviated as The Wealth of Nations , is considered his magnum opus and the first modern work that treats economics as a comprehensive system and an academic discipline. Smith refuses to explain the distribution of wealth and power in terms of God's will and instead appeals to natural, political, social, economic, legal, environmental and technological factors and the interactions among them. Among other economic theories, the work introduced Smith's idea of absolute advantage . \n\nSmith studied social philosophy at the University of Glasgow and at Balliol College, Oxford , where he was one of the first students to benefit from scholarships set up by fellow Scot John Snell . After graduating, he delivered a successful series of public lectures at the University of Edinburgh , leading him to collaborate with David Hume during the Scottish Enlightenment. Smith obtained a professorship at Glasgow, teaching moral philosophy and during this time, wrote and published The Theory of Moral Sentiments . In his later life, he took a tutoring position that allowed him to travel throughout Europe, where he met other intellectual leaders of his day.\n\nAs a reaction to the common policy of protecting national markets and merchants through minimizing imports and maximizing exports, what came to be known as mercantilism , Smith laid the foundations of classical free market economic theory. The Wealth of Nations was a precursor to the modern academic discipline of economics. In this and other works, he developed the concept of division of labour and expounded upon how rational self-interest and competition can lead to economic prosperity. Smith was controversial in his day and his general approach and writing style were often satirised by writers such as Horace Walpole . \n\nSmith was born in Kirkcaldy , in Fife , Scotland. His father, Adam Smith senior, was a Scottish Writer to the Signet (senior solicitor ), advocate and prosecutor (judge advocate) and also served as comptroller of the customs in Kirkcaldy. Smith's mother was born Margaret Douglas, daughter of the landed Robert Douglas of Strathendry, also in Fife; she married Smith's father in 1720. Two months before Smith was born, his father died, leaving his mother a widow. The date of Smith's baptism into the Church of Scotland at Kirkcaldy was 5 June 1723 and this has often been treated as if it were also his date of birth, which is unknown.\n\nAlthough few events in Smith's early childhood are known, the Scottish journalist John Rae , Smith's biographer, recorded that Smith was abducted by Romani at the age of three and released when others went to rescue him. [ b ] Smith was close to his mother, who probably encouraged him to pursue his scholarly ambitions. He attended the Burgh School of Kirkcaldy —characterised by Rae as \"one of the best secondary schools of Scotland at that period\" —from 1729 to 1737, he learned Latin , mathematics, history, and writing. \n\nSmith entered the University of Glasgow at age 14 and studied moral philosophy under Francis Hutcheson . Here he developed his passion for the philosophical concepts of reason , civilian liberties , and free speech . In 1740, he was the graduate scholar presented to undertake postgraduate studies at Balliol College, Oxford , under the Snell Exhibition . \n\nSmith considered the teaching at Glasgow to be far superior to that at Oxford, which he found intellectually stifling. In Book V, Chapter II of The Wealth of Nations , he wrote: \"In the University of Oxford, the greater part of the public professors have, for these many years, given up altogether even the pretence of teaching.\" Smith is also reported to have complained to friends that Oxford officials once discovered him reading a copy of David Hume's A Treatise of Human Nature , and they subsequently confiscated his book and punished him severely for reading it. According to William Robert Scott, \"The Oxford of [Smith's] time gave little if any help towards what was to be his lifework.\" Nevertheless, he took the opportunity while at Oxford to teach himself several subjects by reading many books from the shelves of the large Bodleian Library . When Smith was not studying on his own, his time at Oxford was not a happy one, according to his letters. Near the end of his time there, he began suffering from shaking fits, probably the symptoms of a nervous breakdown. He left Oxford University in 1746, before his scholarship ended. \n\nIn Book V of The Wealth of Nations , Smith comments on the low quality of instruction and the meager intellectual activity at English universities , when compared to their Scottish counterparts. He attributes this both to the rich endowments of the colleges at Oxford and Cambridge , which made the income of professors independent of their ability to attract students, and to the fact that distinguished men of letters could make an even more comfortable living as ministers of the Church of England . \n\nSmith began delivering public lectures in 1748 at the University of Edinburgh , sponsored by the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh under the patronage of Lord Kames . His lecture topics included rhetoric and belles-lettres , and later the subject of \"the progress of opulence\". On this latter topic, he first expounded his economic philosophy of \"the obvious and simple system of natural liberty \". While Smith was not adept at public speaking , his lectures met with success. \n\nIn 1750, Smith met the philosopher David Hume, who was his senior by more than a decade. In their writings covering history, politics, philosophy, economics, and religion, Smith and Hume shared closer intellectual and personal bonds than with other important figures of the Scottish Enlightenment. \n\nIn 1751, Smith earned a professorship at Glasgow University teaching logic courses, and in 1752, he was elected a member of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh, having been introduced to the society by Lord Kames. When the head of Moral Philosophy in Glasgow died the next year, Smith took over the position. He worked as an academic for the next 13 years, which he characterised as \"by far the most useful and therefore by far the happiest and most honorable period [of his life]\". \n\nSmith published The Theory of Moral Sentiments in 1759, embodying some of his Glasgow lectures. This work was concerned with how human morality depends on sympathy between agent and spectator, or the individual and other members of society. Smith defined \"mutual sympathy\" as the basis of moral sentiments . He based his explanation, not on a special \"moral sense\" as the Third Lord Shaftesbury and Hutcheson had done, nor on utility as Hume did, but on mutual sympathy, a term best captured in modern parlance by the 20th-century concept of empathy , the capacity to recognise feelings that are being experienced by another being. \n\nFollowing the publication of The Theory of Moral Sentiments , Smith became so popular that many wealthy students left their schools in other countries to enroll at Glasgow to learn under Smith. At this time, Smith began to give more attention to jurisprudence and economics in his lectures and less to his theories of morals. For example, Smith lectured that the cause of increase in national wealth is labour, rather than the nation's quantity of gold or silver, which is the basis for mercantilism , the economic theory that dominated Western European economic policies at the time. \n\nIn 1762, the University of Glasgow conferred on Smith the title of Doctor of Laws (LL.D.). At the end of 1763, he obtained an offer from British chancellor of the Exchequer Charles Townshend —who had been introduced to Smith by David Hume—to tutor his stepson, Henry Scott , the young Duke of Buccleuch as preparation for a career in international politics. Smith resigned from his professorship in 1764 to take the tutoring position. He subsequently attempted to return the fees he had collected from his students because he had resigned partway through the term, but his students refused. \n\nSmith's tutoring job entailed touring Europe with Scott, during which time he educated Scott on a variety of subjects. He was paid £ 300 per year (plus expenses) along with a £300 per year pension; roughly twice his former income as a teacher. Smith first travelled as a tutor to Toulouse , France, where he stayed for a year and a half. According to his own account, he found Toulouse to be somewhat boring, having written to Hume that he \"had begun to write a book to pass away the time\". After touring the south of France, the group moved to Geneva , where Smith met with the philosopher Voltaire . \n\nFrom Geneva, the party moved to Paris. Here, Smith met American publisher and diplomat Benjamin Franklin , who a few years later would lead the opposition in the American colonies against four British resolutions from Charles Townshend (in history known as the Townshend Acts ), which threatened American colonial self-government and imposed revenue duties on a number of items necessary to the colonies. Smith discovered the Physiocracy school founded by François Quesnay and discussed with their intellectuals. Physiocrats were opposed to mercantilism , the dominating economic theory of the time, illustrated in their motto Laissez faire et laissez passer, le monde va de lui même! (Let do and let pass, the world goes on by itself!).\n\nThe wealth of France had been virtually depleted by Louis XIV [ c ] and Louis XV in ruinous wars, [ d ] and was further exhausted in aiding the American revolutionary soldiers , against the British. Given that the British economy of the day yielded an income distribution that stood in contrast to that which existed in France, Smith concluded that \"with all its imperfections, [the Physiocratic school] is perhaps the nearest approximation to the truth that has yet been published upon the subject of political economy.\" The distinction between productive versus unproductive labour—the physiocratic classe steril —was a predominant issue in the development and understanding of what would become classical economic theory.\n\nIn 1766, Henry Scott's younger brother died in Paris, and Smith's tour as a tutor ended shortly thereafter. Smith returned home that year to Kirkcaldy, and he devoted much of the next decade to writing his magnum opus . There, he befriended Henry Moyes , a young blind man who showed precocious aptitude. Smith secured the patronage of David Hume and Thomas Reid in the young man's education. In May 1767, Smith was elected fellow of the Royal Society of London , and was elected a member of the Literary Club in 1775. The Wealth of Nations was published in 1776 and was an instant success, selling out its first edition in only six months. \n\nIn 1778, Smith was appointed to a post as commissioner of customs in Scotland and went to live with his mother (who died in 1784) in Panmure House in Edinburgh's Canongate . Five years later, as a member of the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh when it received its royal charter, he automatically became one of the founding members of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . From 1787 to 1789, he occupied the honorary position of Lord Rector of the University of Glasgow . \n\nSmith died in the northern wing of Panmure House in Edinburgh on 17 July 1790 after a painful illness. His body was buried in the Canongate Kirkyard . On his deathbed, Smith expressed disappointment that he had not achieved more. \n\nSmith's literary executors were two friends from the Scottish academic world: the physicist and chemist Joseph Black and the pioneering geologist James Hutton . Smith left behind many notes and some unpublished material, but gave instructions to destroy anything that was not fit for publication. He mentioned an early unpublished History of Astronomy as probably suitable, and it duly appeared in 1795, along with other material such as Essays on Philosophical Subjects . \n\nSmith's library went by his will to David Douglas, Lord Reston (son of his cousin Colonel Robert Douglas of Strathendry, Fife), who lived with Smith. It was eventually divided between his two surviving children, Cecilia Margaret (Mrs. Cunningham) and David Anne (Mrs. Bannerman). On the death in 1878 of her husband, the Reverend W. B. Cunningham of Prestonpans, Mrs. Cunningham sold some of the books. The remainder passed to her son, Professor Robert Oliver Cunningham of Queen's College, Belfast, who presented a part to the library of Queen's College. After his death, the remaining books were sold. On the death of Mrs. Bannerman in 1879, her portion of the library went intact to the New College (of the Free Church) in Edinburgh and the collection was transferred to the University of Edinburgh Main Library in 1972.\n\nNot much is known about Smith's personal views beyond what can be deduced from his published articles. His personal papers were destroyed after his death, per his request. He never married, and seems to have maintained a close relationship with his mother, with whom he lived after his return from France and who died six years before him. \n\nSmith was described by several of his contemporaries and biographers as comically absent-minded, with peculiar habits of speech and gait, and a smile of \"inexpressible benignity\". He was known to talk to himself, a habit that began during his childhood when he would smile in rapt conversation with invisible companions. He also had occasional spells of imaginary illness, and he is reported to have had books and papers placed in tall stacks in his study. According to one story, Smith took Charles Townshend on a tour of a tanning factory, and while discussing free trade , Smith walked into a huge tanning pit from which he needed help to escape. He is also said to have put bread and butter into a teapot, drunk the concoction, and declared it to be the worst cup of tea he had ever had. According to another account, Smith distractedly went out walking in his nightgown and ended up 15 miles (24 km) outside of town, before nearby church bells brought him back to reality. \n\nJames Boswell , who was a student of Smith's at Glasgow University, and later knew him at the Literary Club , says that Smith thought that speaking about his ideas in conversation might reduce the sale of his books, so his conversation was unimpressive. According to Boswell, he once told Sir Joshua Reynolds , that \"he made it a rule when in company never to talk of what he understood\". \n\nSmith has been alternatively described as someone who \"had a large nose, bulging eyes, a protruding lower lip, a nervous twitch, and a speech impediment\" and one whose \"countenance was manly and agreeable\". Smith is said to have acknowledged his looks at one point, saying, \"I am a beau in nothing but my books.\" Smith rarely sat for portraits, so almost all depictions of him created during his lifetime were drawn from memory. The best-known portraits of Smith are the profile by James Tassie and two etchings by John Kay . The line engravings produced for the covers of 19th-century reprints of The Wealth of Nations were based largely on Tassie's medallion. \n\nConsiderable scholarly debate has occurred about the nature of Smith's religious views. His father had shown a strong interest in Christianity and belonged to the moderate wing of the Church of Scotland , and the fact that he received the Snell Exhibition suggests that he may have gone to Oxford with the intention of pursuing a career in the Church of England. \n\nAnglo-American economist Ronald Coase challenged the view that Smith was a deist , based on the fact that Smith's writings never explicitly invoke God as an explanation of the harmonies of the natural or the human worlds. According to Coase, though Smith does sometimes refer to the \" Great Architect of the Universe \", later scholars such as Jacob Viner have \"very much exaggerated the extent to which Adam Smith was committed to a belief in a personal God\", a belief for which Coase finds little evidence in passages such as the one in the Wealth of Nations in which Smith writes that the curiosity of mankind about the \"great phenomena of nature\", such as \"the generation, the life, growth, and dissolution of plants and animals\", has led men to \"enquire into their causes\", and that \"superstition first attempted to satisfy this curiosity, by referring all those wonderful appearances to the immediate agency of the gods. Philosophy afterwards endeavoured to account for them, from more familiar causes, or from such as mankind were better acquainted with than the agency of the gods\". Some authors argue that Smith's social and economic philosophy is inherently theological and that his entire model of social order is logically dependent on the notion of God's action in nature. Brendan Long argues that Smith was a theist , whereas according to professor Gavin Kennedy, Smith was \"in some sense\" a Christian. \n\nSmith was also a close friend of David Hume , who, despite debate about his religious views in modern scholarship , was commonly characterised in his own time as an atheist . The publication in 1777 of Smith's letter to William Strahan , in which he described Hume's courage in the face of death in spite of his irreligiosity, attracted considerable controversy. \n\nIn 1759, Smith published his first work, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, sold by co-publishers Andrew Millar of London and Alexander Kincaid of Edinburgh. Smith continued making extensive revisions to the book until his death. [ e ] Although The Wealth of Nations is widely regarded as Smith's most influential work, Smith himself is believed to have considered The Theory of Moral Sentiments to be a superior work. \n\nIn the work, Smith critically examines the moral thinking of his time, and suggests that conscience arises from dynamic and interactive social relationships through which people seek \"mutual sympathy of sentiments.\" His goal in writing the work was to explain the source of mankind's ability to form moral judgment, given that people begin life with no moral sentiments at all. Smith proposes a theory of sympathy, in which the act of observing others and seeing the judgments they form of both others and oneself makes people aware of themselves and how others perceive their behaviour. The feedback received by an individual from perceiving (or imagining) others' judgment creates an incentive to achieve \"mutual sympathy of sentiments\" with them and leads people to develop habits, and then principles, of behaviour, which come to constitute one's conscience. \n\nSome scholars have perceived a conflict between The Theory of Moral Sentiments and The Wealth of Nations ; the former emphasises sympathy for others, while the latter focuses on the role of self-interest. In recent years, however, some scholars of Smith's work have argued that no contradiction exists. They contend that in The Theory of Moral Sentiments , Smith develops a theory of psychology in which individuals seek the approval of the \"impartial spectator\" as a result of a natural desire to have outside observers sympathise with their sentiments. Rather than viewing The Theory of Moral Sentiments and The Wealth of Nations as presenting incompatible views of human nature, some Smith scholars regard the works as emphasising different aspects of human nature that vary depending on the situation. In the first part – The Theory of Moral Sentiments – he laid down the foundation of his vision of humanity and society. In the second – The Wealth of Nations – he elaborated on the virtue of prudence, which for him meant the relations between people in the private sphere of the economy. It was his plan to further elaborate on the virtue of justice in the third book. Otteson argues that both books are Newtonian in their methodology and deploy a similar \"market model\" for explaining the creation and development of large-scale human social orders, including morality, economics, as well as language. Ekelund and Hebert offer a differing view, observing that self-interest is present in both works and that \"in the former, sympathy is the moral faculty that holds self-interest in check, whereas in the latter, competition is the economic faculty that restrains self-interest.\" \n\nDisagreement exists between classical and neoclassical economists about the central message of Smith's most influential work: An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). Neoclassical economists emphasise Smith's invisible hand , a concept mentioned in the middle of his work – Book IV, Chapter II – and classical economists believe that Smith stated his programme for promoting the \"wealth of nations\" in the first sentences, which attributes the growth of wealth and prosperity to the division of labour. He elaborated on the virtue of prudence, which for him meant the relations between people in the private sphere of the economy. He planned to further elaborate on the virtue of justice in the third book. \n\nSmith used the term \"the invisible hand\" in \"History of Astronomy\" referring to \"the invisible hand of Jupiter\", and once in each of his The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) and The Wealth of Nations (1776). This last statement about \"an invisible hand\" has been interpreted in numerous ways.\n\nAs every individual, therefore, endeavours as much as he can both to employ his capital in the support of domestic industry, and so to direct that industry that its produce may be of the greatest value; every individual necessarily labours to render the annual revenue of the society as great as he can. He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it. I have never known much good done by those who affected to trade for the public good. It is an affectation, indeed, not very common among merchants, and very few words need be employed in dissuading them from it.\n\nThose who regard that statement as Smith's central message also quote frequently Smith's dictum: \n\nIt is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them of our own necessities but of their advantages.\n\nHowever, in The Theory of Moral Sentiments he had a more sceptical approach to self-interest as driver of behaviour:\n\nHow selfish soever man may be supposed, there are evidently some principles in his nature, which interest him in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to him, though he derives nothing from it except the pleasure of seeing it.\n\nIn relation to Mandeville 's contention that \"Private Vices ... may be turned into Public Benefits\", Smith's belief that when an individual pursues his self-interest under conditions of justice, he unintentionally promotes the good of society. Self-interested competition in the free market, he argued, would tend to benefit society as a whole by keeping prices low, while still building in an incentive for a wide variety of goods and services. Nevertheless, he was wary of businessmen and warned of their \"conspiracy against the public or in some other contrivance to raise prices.\" Again and again, Smith warned of the collusive nature of business interests, which may form cabals or monopolies , fixing the highest price \"which can be squeezed out of the buyers.\" Smith also warned that a business-dominated political system would allow a conspiracy of businesses and industry against consumers, with the former scheming to influence politics and legislation. Smith states that the interest of manufacturers and merchants \"in any particular branch of trade or manufactures, is always in some respects different from, and even opposite to, that of the public ... The proposal of any new law or regulation of commerce which comes from this order, ought always to be listened to with great precaution, and ought never be adopted till after having been long and carefully examined, not only with the most scrupulous but with the most suspicious attention.\" Thus Smith's chief worry seems to be when business is given special protections or privileges from government; by contrast, in the absence of such special political favours, he believed that business activities were generally beneficial to the whole society:\n\nIt is the great multiplication of the production of all the different arts, in consequence of the division of labour, which occasions, in a well-governed society, that universal opulence which extends itself to the lowest ranks of the people. Every workman has a great quantity of his own work to dispose of beyond what he himself has occasion for; and every other workman being exactly in the same situation, he is enabled to exchange a great quantity of his own goods for a great quantity, or, what comes to the same thing, for the price of a great quantity of theirs. He supplies them abundantly with what they have occasion for, and they accommodate him as amply with what he has occasion for, and a general plenty diffuses itself through all the different ranks of society. ( The Wealth of Nations, I.i.10)\n\nThe neoclassical interest in Smith's statement about \"an invisible hand\" originates in the possibility of seeing it as a precursor of neoclassical economics and its concept of general equilibrium ; Samuelson 's \"Economics\" refers six times to Smith's \"invisible hand\". To emphasise this connection, Samuelson quotes Smith's \"invisible hand\" statement substituting \"general interest\" for \"public interest\". Samuelson concludes: \"Smith was unable to prove the essence of his invisible-hand doctrine. Indeed, until the 1940s, no one knew how to prove, even to state properly, the kernel of truth in this proposition about perfectly competitive market.\"\n\nConversely, classical economists see in Smith's first sentences his programme to promote \"The Wealth of Nations\". Using the physiocratical concept of the economy as a circular process, to secure growth the inputs of Period 2 must exceed the inputs of Period 1. Therefore, those outputs of Period 1 which are not used or usable as inputs of Period 2 are regarded as unproductive labour, as they do not contribute to growth. This is what Smith had heard in France from, among others, François Quesnay , whose ideas Smith was so impressed by that he might have dedicated The Wealth of Nations to him had he not died beforehand. To this French insight that unproductive labour should be reduced to use labour more productively, Smith added his own proposal, that productive labour should be made even more productive by deepening the division of labour . Smith argued that deepening the division of labour under competition leads to greater productivity, which leads to lower prices and thus an increasing standard of living—\"general plenty\" and \"universal opulence\"—for all. Extended markets and increased production lead to the continuous reorganisation of production and the invention of new ways of producing, which in turn lead to further increased production, lower prices, and improved standards of living. Smith's central message is, therefore, that under dynamic competition, a growth machine secures \"The Wealth of Nations\". Smith's argument predicted Britain's evolution as the workshop of the world, underselling and outproducing all its competitors. The opening sentences of the \"Wealth of Nations\" summarise this policy:\n\nThe annual labour of every nation is the fund which originally supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniences of life which it annually consumes ... . [T]his produce ... bears a greater or smaller proportion to the number of those who are to consume it ... .[B]ut this proportion must in every nation be regulated by two different circumstances;\n\nHowever, Smith added that the \"abundance or scantiness of this supply too seems to depend more upon the former of those two circumstances than upon the latter.\" \n\nIn The Wealth of Nations , Smith states four maxims of taxation: (1) equality (people must contribute to the support of the government in proportion to their abilities), (2) certainty (the time, manner, and quantity of tax imposed must be certain, transparent, and not arbitrary), (3) convenience for taxpayers, and (4) economy in tax collection. : 2 According to Smith, \"It is not very unreasonable that the rich should contribute to the public expense, not only in proportion to their revenue, but something more in that proportion\". : 98\n\nSmith wrote that a government is duty-bound to provide public services that \"support the whole of society\" like provide public education, transportation, national defense, a justice system, public safety, and public infrastructure to support commerce. : 163\n\nShortly before his death, Smith had nearly all his manuscripts destroyed. In his last years, he seemed to have been planning two major treatises, one on the theory and history of law and one on the sciences and arts. The posthumously published Essays on Philosophical Subjects , a history of astronomy down to Smith's own era, plus some thoughts on ancient physics and metaphysics , probably contain parts of what would have been the latter treatise. Lectures on Jurisprudence were notes taken from Smith's early lectures, plus an early draft of The Wealth of Nations , published as part of the 1976 Glasgow Edition of the works and correspondence of Smith. Other works, including some published posthumously, include Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue, and Arms (1763) (first published in 1896); and Essays on Philosophical Subjects (1795). \n\nThe Wealth of Nations was a precursor to the modern academic discipline of economics. In this and other works, Smith expounded how rational self-interest and competition can lead to economic prosperity. Smith was controversial in his own day and his general approach and writing style were often satirised by Tory writers in the moralising tradition of Hogarth and Swift, as a discussion at the University of Winchester suggests. In 2005, The Wealth of Nations was named among the 100 Best Scottish Books of all time. \n\nIn light of the arguments put forward by Smith and other economic theorists in Britain, academic belief in mercantilism began to decline in Britain in the late 18th century. During the Industrial Revolution , Britain embraced free trade and Smith's laissez-faire economics, and via the British Empire , used its power to spread a broadly liberal economic model around the world, characterised by open markets, and relatively barrier-free domestic and international trade. \n\nGeorge Stigler attributes to Smith \"the most important substantive proposition in all of economics\". It is that, under competition, owners of resources (for example labour, land, and capital) will use them most profitably, resulting in an equal rate of return in equilibrium for all uses, adjusted for apparent differences arising from such factors as training, trust, hardship, and unemployment. \n\nPaul Samuelson finds in Smith's pluralist use of supply and demand as applied to wages, rents, and profit a valid and valuable anticipation of the general equilibrium modelling of Walras a century later. Smith's allowance for wage increases in the short and intermediate term from capital accumulation and invention contrasted with Malthus , Ricardo , and Karl Marx in their propounding a rigid subsistence–wage theory of labour supply. \n\nJoseph Schumpeter criticised Smith for a lack of technical rigour, yet he argued that this enabled Smith's writings to appeal to wider audiences: \"His very limitation made for success. Had he been more brilliant, he would not have been taken so seriously. Had he dug more deeply, had he unearthed more recondite truth, had he used more difficult and ingenious methods, he would not have been understood. But he had no such ambitions; in fact he disliked whatever went beyond plain common sense. He never moved above the heads of even the dullest readers. He led them on gently, encouraging them by trivialities and homely observations, making them feel comfortable all along.\" \n\nClassical economists presented competing theories to those of Smith, termed the \" labour theory of value \". Later Marxian economics descending from classical economics also use Smith's labour theories, in part. The first volume of Karl Marx 's major work, Das Kapital , was published in German in 1867. In it, Marx focused on the labour theory of value and what he considered to be the exploitation of labour by capital. The labour theory of value held that the value of a thing was determined by the labour that went into its production. This contrasts with the modern contention of neoclassical economics , that the value of a thing is determined by what one is willing to give up to obtain the thing.\n\nThe body of theory later termed \"neoclassical economics\" or \" marginalism \" formed from about 1870 to 1910. The term \"economics\" was popularised by such neoclassical economists as Alfred Marshall as a concise synonym for \"economic science\" and a substitute for the earlier, broader term \" political economy \" used by Smith. This corresponded to the influence on the subject of mathematical methods used in the natural sciences . Neoclassical economics systematised supply and demand as joint determinants of price and quantity in market equilibrium, affecting both the allocation of output and the distribution of income. It dispensed with the labour theory of value of which Smith was most famously identified with in classical economics, in favour of a marginal utility theory of value on the demand side and a more general theory of costs on the supply side. \n\nThe bicentennial anniversary of the publication of The Wealth of Nations was celebrated in 1976, resulting in increased interest for The Theory of Moral Sentiments and his other works throughout academia. After 1976, Smith was more likely to be represented as the author of both The Wealth of Nations and The Theory of Moral Sentiments , and thereby as the founder of a moral philosophy and the science of economics. His homo economicus or \"economic man\" was also more often represented as a moral person. Additionally, economists David Levy and Sandra Peart in \"The Secret History of the Dismal Science\" point to his opposition to hierarchy and beliefs in inequality, including racial inequality, and provide additional support for those who point to Smith's opposition to slavery, colonialism, and empire. Emphasised also are Smith's statements of the need for high wages for the poor, and the efforts to keep wages low. In The \"Vanity of the Philosopher: From Equality to Hierarchy in Postclassical Economics\", Peart and Levy also cite Smith's view that a common street porter was not intellectually inferior to a philosopher, and point to the need for greater appreciation of the public views in discussions of science and other subjects now considered to be technical. They also cite Smith's opposition to the often expressed view that science is superior to common sense. \n\nSmith also explained the relationship between growth of private property and civil government:\n\nMen may live together in society with some tolerable degree of security, though there is no civil magistrate to protect them from the injustice of those passions. But avarice and ambition in the rich, in the poor the hatred of labour and the love of present ease and enjoyment, are the passions which prompt to invade property, passions much more steady in their operation, and much more universal in their influence. Wherever there is great property there is great inequality. For one very rich man there must be at least five hundred poor, and the affluence of the few supposes the indigence of the many. The affluence of the rich excites the indignation of the poor, who are often both driven by want, and prompted by envy, to invade his possessions. It is only under the shelter of the civil magistrate that the owner of that valuable property, which is acquired by the labour of many years, or perhaps of many successive generations, can sleep a single night in security. He is at all times surrounded by unknown enemies, whom, though he never provoked, he can never appease, and from whose injustice he can be protected only by the powerful arm of the civil magistrate continually held up to chastise it. The acquisition of valuable and extensive property, therefore, necessarily requires the establishment of civil government. Where there is no property, or at least none that exceeds the value of two or three days' labour, civil government is not so necessary. Civil government supposes a certain subordination. But as the necessity of civil government gradually grows up with the acquisition of valuable property, so the principal causes which naturally introduce subordination gradually grow up with the growth of that valuable property. (...) Men of inferior wealth combine to defend those of superior wealth in the possession of their property, in order that men of superior wealth may combine to defend them in the possession of theirs. All the inferior shepherds and herdsmen feel that the security of their own herds and flocks depends upon the security of those of the great shepherd or herdsman; that the maintenance of their lesser authority depends upon that of his greater authority, and that upon their subordination to him depends his power of keeping their inferiors in subordination to them. They constitute a sort of little nobility, who feel themselves interested to defend the property and to support the authority of their own little sovereign in order that he may be able to defend their property and to support their authority. Civil government, so far as it is instituted for the security of property, is in reality instituted for the defence of the rich against the poor, or of those who have some property against those who have none at all. \n\nSmith opposed empire. He challenged ideas that colonies were key to British prosperity and power. He rejected that other cultures, such as China and India, were culturally and developmentally inferior to Europe. While he favoured \"commercial society\", he did not support radical social change and the imposition of commercial society on other societies. He proposed that colonies be given independence or that full political rights be extended to colonial subjects. \n\nSmith's chapter on colonies, in turn, would help shape British imperial debates from the mid-19th century onward. The Wealth of Nations would become an ambiguous text regarding the imperial question. In his chapter on colonies, Smith pondered how to solve the crisis developing across the Atlantic among the empire's 13 American colonies. He offered two different proposals for easing tensions. The first proposal called for giving the colonies their independence, and by thus parting on a friendly basis, Britain would be able to develop and maintain a free-trade relationship with them, and possibly even an informal military alliance. Smith's second proposal called for a theoretical imperial federation that would bring the colonies and the metropole closer together through an imperial parliamentary system and imperial free trade. \n\nSmith's most prominent disciple in 19th-century Britain, peace advocate Richard Cobden , preferred the first proposal. Cobden would lead the Anti-Corn Law League in overturning the Corn Laws in 1846, shifting Britain to a policy of free trade and empire \"on the cheap\" for decades to come. This hands-off approach toward the British Empire would become known as Cobdenism or the Manchester School . By the turn of the century, however, advocates of Smith's second proposal such as Joseph Shield Nicholson would become ever more vocal in opposing Cobdenism, calling instead for imperial federation. As Marc-William Palen notes: \"On the one hand, Adam Smith's late nineteenth and early twentieth-century Cobdenite adherents used his theories to argue for gradual imperial devolution and empire 'on the cheap'. On the other, various proponents of imperial federation throughout the British World sought to use Smith's theories to overturn the predominant Cobdenite hands-off imperial approach and instead, with a firm grip, bring the empire closer than ever before.\" Smith's ideas thus played an important part in subsequent debates over the British Empire.\n\nSmith has been commemorated in the UK on banknotes printed by two different banks; his portrait has appeared since 1981 on the £ 50 notes issued by the Clydesdale Bank in Scotland, and in March 2007 Smith's image also appeared on the new series of £20 notes issued by the Bank of England , making him the first Scotsman to feature on an English banknote . \n\nBetween 1867 and 1870, a statue of Smith was built into the outside wall of 6 Burlington Gardens , then the headquarters of the University of London (now home to the Royal Academy of Arts ). A large-scale memorial of Smith by Alexander Stoddart was unveiled on 4 July 2008 in Edinburgh. It is a 10-foot (3.0 m)-tall bronze sculpture and it stands above the Royal Mile outside St Giles' Cathedral in Parliament Square, near the Mercat cross . Sculptor Jim Sanborn has created multiple pieces which feature Smith's work. At Central Connecticut State University is Circulating Capital , a tall cylinder which features an extract from The Wealth of Nations on the lower half, and on the upper half, some of the same text, but represented in binary code . At the University of North Carolina at Charlotte , outside the Belk College of Business Administration, is Adam Smith's Spinning Top . Another Smith sculpture is at Cleveland State University . Smith also appears as the narrator in the 2013 play The Low Road , centred on a proponent on laissez-faire economics in the late 18th century, but dealing obliquely with the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession ; he was portrayed by Bill Paterson in the premiere production at the Royal Court Theatre in London. \n\nA bust of Smith is in the Hall of Heroes of the National Wallace Monument in Stirling . Five paving stones, displaying quotations from Smith's works, were unveiled in December 2023 in the High Street, Glasgow . The stones were commissioned by the University of Glasgow to mark the 300th anniversary of Smith's birth. \n\nAdam Smith resided at Panmure House from 1778 to 1790. In 2008, the house was purchased by the Edinburgh Business School at Heriot-Watt University and funds were raised for its restoration. In 2018 it was formally opened as a study centre in Smith's honour. \n\nSmith has been celebrated by advocates of free-market policies as the founder of free-market economics, a view reflected in the naming of bodies such as the Adam Smith Institute in London, multiple entities known as the \"Adam Smith Society\", including an historical Italian organisation, and the U.S.-based Adam Smith Society , and the Australian Adam Smith Club, and in terms such as the Adam Smith necktie. \n\nFormer US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan argues that, while Smith did not coin the term laissez-faire , \"it was left to Adam Smith to identify the more-general set of principles that brought conceptual clarity to the seeming chaos of market transactions.\" Greenspan continues that The Wealth of Nations was \"one of the great achievements in human intellectual history.\" P.J. O'Rourke describes Smith as the \"founder of free market economics.\" \n\nNobel laureate economist Milton Friedman believed in 1976, 200 years after the publishing of The Wealth of Nations , that the work of Adam Smith was, \"...far more immediately relevant today than he was at the Centennial of The Wealth of Nations in 1876.\" \n\nOther writers have argued that Smith's support for laissez-faire (which in French means leave alone) has been overstated. Herbert Stein wrote that the people who \"wear an Adam Smith necktie\" do it to \"make a statement of their devotion to the idea of free markets and limited government \", and that this misrepresents Smith's ideas. Stein writes that Smith \"was not pure or doctrinaire about this idea. He viewed government intervention in the market with great skepticism...yet he was prepared to accept or propose qualifications to that policy in the specific cases where he judged that their net effect would be beneficial and would not undermine the basically free character of the system. He did not wear the Adam Smith necktie.\" In Stein's reading, The Wealth of Nations could justify the Food and Drug Administration , the Consumer Product Safety Commission , mandatory employer health benefits, environmentalism, and \" discriminatory taxation to deter improper or luxurious behavior \". \n\nSimilarly, Vivienne Brown stated in The Economic Journal that in the 20th-century United States, Reaganomics supporters, The Wall Street Journal , and other similar sources have spread among the general public a partial and misleading vision of Smith, portraying him as an \"extreme dogmatic defender of laissez-faire capitalism and supply-side economics \". In fact, The Wealth of Nations includes the following statement on the payment of taxes:\n\nThe subjects of every state ought to contribute towards the support of the government, as nearly as possible, in proportion to their respective abilities; that is, in proportion to the revenue which they respectively enjoy under the protection of the state. \n\nSome commentators have argued that Smith's works show support for a progressive, not flat, income tax and that he specifically named taxes that he thought should be required by the state, among them luxury-goods taxes and tax on rent. Yet Smith argued for the \"impossibility of taxing the people, in proportion to their economic revenue, by any capitation\". Smith argued that taxes should principally go toward protecting \"justice\" and \"certain publick institutions\" that were necessary for the benefit of all of society, which could not be adequately provided by private enterprise. \n\nAdditionally, Smith outlined the proper expenses of the government in The Wealth of Nations, Book V, Ch. I . Included in his requirements of a government is to enforce contracts and provide justice system, grant patents and copy rights, provide public goods such as infrastructure, provide national defence, and regulate banking. The role of the government was to provide goods \"of such a nature that the profit could never repay the expense to any individual\" such as roads, bridges, canals, and harbours. He also encouraged invention and new ideas through his patent enforcement and support of infant industry monopolies. He supported partial public subsidies for elementary education, and he believed that competition among religious institutions would provide general benefit to the society. In such cases, Smith argued for local rather than centralised control: \"Even those publick works which are of such a nature that they cannot afford any revenue for maintaining themselves ... are always better maintained by a local or provincial revenue, under the management of a local and provincial administration, than by the general revenue of the state\" ( Wealth of Nations, V.i.d.18). Finally, he outlined how the government should support the dignity of the monarch or chief magistrate, such that they are equal or above the public in fashion. He further stated that monarchs should be provided for in a greater fashion than magistrates of a republic because \"we naturally expect more splendor in the court of a king than in the mansion-house of a doge \". In addition, he allowed that in some specific circumstances, retaliatory tariffs may be beneficial:\n\nThe recovery of a great foreign market will generally more than compensate the transitory inconvenience of paying dearer during a short time for some sorts of goods. \n\nHowever, he added that in general, a retaliatory tariff \"seems a bad method of compensating the injury done to certain classes of our people, to do another injury ourselves, not only to those classes, but to almost all the other classes of them\". \n\nEconomic historians such as Jacob Viner regard Smith as a strong advocate of free markets and limited government (what Smith called \"natural liberty\"), but not as a dogmatic supporter of laissez-faire . \n\nEconomist Daniel Klein believes using the term \"free-market economics\" or \"free-market economist\" to identify the ideas of Smith is too general and slightly misleading. Klein offers six characteristics central to the identity of Smith's economic thought and argues that a new name is needed to give a more accurate depiction of the \"Smithian\" identity. Economist David Ricardo set straight some of the misunderstandings about Smith's thoughts on free market. Many continue to fall victim to the thinking that Smith was a free-market economist without exception, though he was not. Ricardo pointed out that Smith was in support of helping infant industries. Smith believed that the government should subsidise newly formed industry, but he did fear that when the infant industry grew into adulthood, it would be unwilling to surrender the government help. Smith also supported tariffs on imported goods to counteract an internal tax on the same good. Smith also fell to pressure in supporting some tariffs in support for national defence. \n\nSome have also claimed, Emma Rothschild among them, that Smith would have supported a minimum wage, although no direct textual evidence supports the claim. Indeed, Smith wrote:\n\nThe price of labour, it must be observed, cannot be ascertained very accurately anywhere, different prices being often paid at the same place and for the same sort of labour, not only according to the different abilities of the workmen, but according to the easiness or hardness of the masters. Where wages are not regulated by law, all that we can pretend to determine is what are the most usual; and experience seems to show that law can never regulate them properly, though it has often pretended to do so. ( The Wealth of Nations , Book 1, Chapter 8)\n\nHowever, Smith also noted, to the contrary, the existence of an imbalanced, inequality of bargaining power : \n\nA landlord, a farmer, a master manufacturer, a merchant, though they did not employ a single workman, could generally live a year or two upon the stocks which they have already acquired. Many workmen could not subsist a week, few could subsist a month, and scarce any a year without employment. In the long run, the workman may be as necessary to his master as his master is to him, but the necessity is not so immediate.",
  "The Accademia Carrara , ( Italian pronunciation: [karˈraːra] ), officially Accademia Carrara di Belle Arti di Bergamo , is an art gallery and an academy of fine arts in Bergamo , in Lombardy in northern Italy. The art gallery was established in about 1780 by Giacomo Carrara [ it ] , a Bergamasco collector or conoscitore of the arts. The academy of fine arts was added to it in 1794. : 293 The school was recognised by the Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca , the Italian ministry of education, in 1988 : 293 and in 2023 merged with the Conservatorio Gaetano Donizetti to form the Politecnico delle Arti di Bergamo . \n\nThe art gallery was established in the early 1780s by Giacomo Carrara [ it ] , a Bergamasco collector or conoscitore of the arts; by 1785 it was open to some visitors. An academy of fine arts was added to it in 1793 or 1794, : 293 initially under the direction of the Milanese painter Carlo Dionigi Sadis . \n\nCarrara made his will in 1795, leaving his entire estate to the gallery and art school he had founded; these were to be managed by a five-member commission, of which the first five were chosen by him. He died the next year. \n\nThe building was partly built by Carrara between 1775 and 1781 to designs by Costantino Gallizioli ; it incorporated parts of earlier structures. It was modified between 1808 and 1813 to designs in Neo-Classical style by Simone Elia [ it ] , who had been a pupil of Leopoldo Pollack at the Accademia di Brera . \n\nIn 1958 the Comune di Bergamo took over the management of the gallery and school, : 293 which in 1988 was recognised by the Ministero dell'Istruzione, dell'Università e della Ricerca , the Italian ministry of education, and came under the administration of that ministry. : 293 \n\nThe directors-general at the Accademia Carrara have been, in chronological order, Giuseppe Diotti , Enrico Scuri , Cesare Tallone , Ponziano Loverini , Luigi Brignoli , Achille Funi , Trento Longaretti , Pierluigi De Vecchi , Mario Cresci and Maria Grazia Recanati. ",
  "A mic drop is the gesture of intentionally dropping one's microphone at the end of a performance or speech to signal triumph . Figuratively, it is an expression of triumph for a successful event and indicates a boastful attitude toward one's own performance. \n\nWhen laying down his magazine Then Swänska Argus at the end of 1734, Swedish journalist Olof von Dalin ended with the words \"as I now throw my pen\" (när jag nu kastar min penna), typeset in a slanted manner, as a display of actually throwing his pen. (Possibly this was copied from The Spectator by Addison and Steele or other magazines of the time.)\n\nThe gesture with a microphone became prevalent in the 1980s, when it was used by rappers and comedians. [ better source needed ] Performers from different groups can engage in confrontational performance styles — rappers may participate in rap battles ; comedians may interact with a heckler in the audience — and dropping the microphone after a particularly effective line indicated complete confidence in the opponent's inability to come back with anything that would be worthy of a response. Johnny Rotten , lead singer of the British punk band the Sex Pistols performed a mic drop at the end of a concert at the Mafcentrum Maasbree, Netherlands, in December 1977. Another early occurrence was Eddie Murphy in 1983 in his standup show Delirious . He did it again in his 1988 film Coming to America after a musical performance of “ The Greatest Love of All ” when playing the character Randy Watson.\n\nThe gesture gained increased popularity from 2012. US President Barack Obama performed a mic drop on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon , which has been credited with popularising the meme . Then at the White House Correspondents' Dinner on April 30, 2016, Obama ended his speech with the words \"Obama out\", then dropped a mic, evoking a speech by the then retiring NBA basketball player Kobe Bryant , who had ended his speech with the words \"mamba out\" at the end of his last game on April 14, 2016. In 2017, RM , the leader of boy band BTS , revealed that the track \" Mic Drop \" from their extended play Love Yourself: Her was inspired by Obama's speech. A figurative use also features in a promotional video for the Invictus Games featuring Obama and the British Royal Family . \n\nGoogle introduced a \"mic drop\" feature to Gmail on April 1, 2016, as an April Fools' Day joke, allowing users to send a GIF of a Minion dropping a microphone as a reply to any email. If used, the feature also prevented the sender from seeing any subsequent replies that the recipient sent. The feature was removed within hours after Google received complaints from some users, with some reporting that they lost their job as a result of accidentally using it. ",
  "Ellen von Unwerth (born 1954) is a German photographer. She began her career as a fashion model, before becoming a fashion, editorial, and advertising photographer. \n\nVon Unwerth was born in Frankfurt , West Germany. As an orphan, during her early childhood, she often ended up in Bavarian foster care systems. Eventually, von Unwerth was able to graduate high school in Munich, where she would work as a circus magician's assistant for three years. \n\nAt the age of twenty while walking down the street, von Unwerth was asked by a photographer if she ever thought about having a modeling career. She decided to give modeling a chance and moved to Paris where she had a successful modeling career for 7 years. \n\nHowever, von Unwerth felt that as a model, she did not have the freedom to decide where and how her image would be used. Her boyfriend at the time gave her a camera, leading to an impromptu photo shoot in Kenya by her of her model colleagues. When the photos were published, von Unwerth decided that this was the new path she would take in life, as the demand for her photography skills outgrew her demand as a model. \n\nVon Unwerth's first notable work was when she first photographed Claudia Schiffer in 1989. Her work has been published in Vogue , Vanity Fair , Interview , The Face , Arena , Twill , L'Uomo Vogue , I-D , and Playboy , and she has published several books of photography.\n\nVon Unwerth did promotional photography for Duran Duran from 1994 to 1997 and did some photography for their 1990 album Liberty and 1997 album Medazzaland . Her work has been used on other album covers including Bananarama 's Pop Life (1991), Belinda Carlisle's A Woman and a Man (1996), Cathy Dennis ' Am I the Kinda Girl? (1996), Janet Jackson 's The Velvet Rope (1997), All Saints ' Saints & Sinners (2000), Dido 's Life for Rent (2003), Britney Spears ' Blackout (2007), Christina Aguilera 's Back To Basics (2006) and Keeps Gettin' Better: A Decade of Hits and Rihanna 's Rated R and Talk That Talk . She also shot the cover of Hole's album Live Through This (1994). \n\nShe shows women in enticing ways without objectifying them. In an interview with V Magazine , she said: \"I never force women to do anything, but I give them roles to play so they are always active and empowered. In a 2018 interview with Harper's Bazaar , she explained her feminist approach to photography: \"The women in my pictures are always strong, even if they are also sexy. My women always look self-assured. I try to make them look as beautiful as they can because every woman wants to feel beautiful, sexy and powerful. That's what I try to do.\" \n\nVon Unwerth has directed short films for fashion designers, and music videos for several pop musicians. She has directed commercials and web films for Revlon , Clinique , L'Oreal and Equinox .",
  "Les Sœurs Boulay (The Boulay Sisters) are a Canadian folk music group from Quebec , consisting of sisters Stéphanie and Mélanie Boulay. Originally from the Gaspésie , they are currently based in Montreal . \n\nThe Boulay sisters released their full-length debut album, Le poids des confettis , on Grosse Boîte in early 2013. Their song \"Mappemonde\" was a shortlisted nominee for the 2013 SOCAN Songwriting Prize , and the album was a longlisted nominee for the 2013 Polaris Music Prize . That year the pair were nominated for GAMIQ awards in seven categories. \n\nThe duo toured around Quebec in support of their album, singing and playing guitar and ukulele. \n\nThey released the follow-up 4488 de l'amour in October 2015. The title track received airplay on east coast radio stations. They continued touring, but in larger venues as their fan base grew. \n\nIn late 2017 the sisters took a break from touring because of Mélanie's pregnancy. \n\nAlbums",
  "List of Lilium species\n\nLilium ( / ˈ l ɪ l i ə m / LIL -ee-əm ) is a genus of herbaceous flowering plants growing from bulbs, all with large and often prominent flowers. Lilies are a group of flowering plants which are important in culture and literature in much of the world. Most species are native to the Northern Hemisphere and their range is temperate climates and extends into the subtropics . Many other plants have \"lily\" in their common names , but do not belong to the same genus and are therefore not true lilies. True lilies are known to be highly toxic to cats. \n\nLilies are tall perennials ranging in height from 1–6 ft (30–180 cm). They form naked or tunicless scaly underground bulbs which are their organs of perennation . In some North American species the base of the bulb develops into rhizomes , on which numerous small bulbs are found. Some species develop stolons . Most bulbs are buried deep in the ground, but a few species form bulbs near the soil surface. Many species form stem-roots. With these, the bulb grows naturally at some depth in the soil, and each year the new stem puts out adventitious roots above the bulb as it emerges from the soil. These roots are in addition to the basal roots that develop at the base of the bulb, a number of species also produce contractile roots that move the bulbs deeper into the soil. \n\nThe flowers are large, often fragrant, and come in a wide range of colors including whites, yellows, oranges, pinks, reds and purples. Markings include spots and brush strokes. The plants are late spring- or summer-flowering. Flowers are borne in racemes or umbels at the tip of the stem, with six tepals spreading or reflexed, to give flowers varying from funnel shape to a \"Turk's cap\". The tepals are free from each other, and bear a nectary at the base of each flower. The ovary is 'superior', borne above the point of attachment of the anthers . The fruit is a three-celled capsule. \n\nSeeds ripen in late summer. They exhibit varying and sometimes complex germination patterns, many adapted to cool temperate climates.\n\nMost cool temperate species are deciduous and dormant in winter in their native environment. But a few species native to areas with hot summers and mild winters ( Lilium candidum , Lilium catesbaei , Lilium longiflorum ) lose their leaves and enter a short dormant period in summer or autumn, sprout from autumn to winter, forming dwarf stems bearing a basal rosette of leaves until, after they have received sufficient chilling, the stem begins to elongate in warming weather.\n\nThe basic chromosome number is twelve (n=12). \n\nTaxonomical division in sections follows the classical division of Comber, species acceptance follows the World Checklist of Selected Plant Families , the taxonomy of section Pseudolirium is from the Flora of North America, the taxonomy of Section Liriotypus is given in consideration of Resetnik et al. 2007, the taxonomy of Chinese species (various sections) follows the Flora of China and the taxonomy of Section Sinomartagon follows Nishikawa et al. as does the taxonomy of Section Archelirion . \n\nThe Sinomartagon are divided in three paraphyletic groups, while the Leucolirion are divided in two paraphyletic groups. \n\nThere are seven sections:\n\nThere are 119 species counted in this genus. For a full list of accepted species with their native ranges, see List of Lilium species .\n\nSome species formerly included within this genus have now been placed in other genera. These genera include Cardiocrinum , Notholirion , and Fritillaria . Four other genuses, Lirium , Martagon , Martagon and Nomocharis are considered to synonyms by most sources. \n\nThe botanic name Lilium is the Latin form and is a Linnaean name. The Latin name is derived from the Greek word λείριον leírion , generally assumed to refer to true, white lilies as exemplified by the Madonna lily . The word was borrowed from Coptic (dial. Fayyumic) hleri , from standard hreri , from Demotic hrry , from Egyptian hrṛt \"flower\". Meillet maintains that both the Egyptian and the Greek word are possible loans from an extinct, substratum language of the Eastern Mediterranean. [ citation needed ] Ancient Greek : κρῖνον , krīnon , was used by the Greeks, albeit for lilies of any color. \n\nThe term \"lily\" has in the past been applied to numerous flowering plants, often with only superficial resemblance to the true lily, including water lily , fire lily , lily of the Nile , calla lily , trout lily , kaffir lily , cobra lily , lily of the valley , daylily , ginger lily , Amazon lily , leek lily , Peruvian lily , and others. All English translations of the Bible render the Hebrew shūshan , shōshan , shōshannā as \"lily\", but the \"lily among the thorns\" of Song of Solomon , for instance, may be the honeysuckle. \n\nThe range of lilies in the Old World extends across much of Europe, across most of Asia to Japan, south to India, and east to Indochina and the Philippines. In the New World they extend from southern Canada through much of the United States. They are commonly adapted to either woodland habitats, often montane , or sometimes to grassland habitats. A few can survive in marshland and epiphytes are known in tropical southeast Asia. In general they prefer moderately acidic or lime-free soils.\n\nLilies are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including the Dun-bar .\n\nThe proliferation of deer (e.g. Odocoileus virginianus ) in North America, mainly due to factors such as the elimination of large predators for human safety, is responsible there for a downturn in lily populations in the wild and is a threat to garden lilies as well. Fences as high as 8 feet may be required to prevent them from consuming the plants, an impractical solution for most wild areas. \n\nMany species are widely grown in the garden in temperate , sub-tropical and tropical regions. Numerous ornamental hybrids have been developed. They are used in herbaceous borders, woodland and shrub plantings, and as patio plants. Some lilies, especially Lilium longiflorum , form important cut flower crops or potted plants. These are forced to flower outside of the normal flowering season for particular markets; for instance, Lilium longiflorum for the Easter trade, when it may be called the Easter lily.\n\nLilies are usually planted as bulbs in the dormant season. They are best planted in a south-facing (northern hemisphere), slightly sloping aspect, in sun or part shade, at a depth 2½ times the height of the bulb (except Lilium candidum which should be planted at the surface). Most prefer a porous, loamy soil, and good drainage is essential. Most species bloom in July or August (northern hemisphere). The flowering periods of certain lily species begin in late spring, while others bloom in late summer or early autumn. They have contractile roots which pull the plant down to the correct depth, therefore it is better to plant them too shallowly than too deep. A soil pH of around 6.5 is generally safe. Most grow best in well-drained soils, and plants are watered during the growing season. Some species and cultivars have strong wiry stems, but those with heavy flower heads are staked to stay upright. \n\nThe following lily species and cultivars currently hold the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit (confirmed 2017): \n\nNumerous forms, mostly hybrids, are grown for the garden. They vary according to the species and interspecific hybrids that they derived from, and are classified in the following broad groups: \n\nThe flowers can be classified by flower aspect and form: \n\nMany newer commercial varieties are developed by using new technologies such as ovary culture and embryo rescue. \n\nAphids may infest plants. Leatherjackets feed on the roots. Larvae of the Scarlet lily beetle can cause serious damage to the stems and leaves. The scarlet beetle lays its eggs and completes its life cycle only on true lilies ( Lilium ) and fritillaries ( Fritillaria ). Oriental, rubrum, tiger and trumpet lilies as well as Oriental trumpets (orienpets) and Turk's cap lilies and native North American Lilium species are all vulnerable, but the beetle prefers some types over others. The beetle could also be having an effect on native Canadian species and some rare and endangered species found in northeastern North America. Daylilies ( Hemerocallis , not true lilies) are excluded from this category. Plants can suffer from damage caused by mice, deer and squirrels. Slugs, snails and millipedes attack seedlings, leaves and flowers.\n\nBrown spots on damp leaves may signal an infection of Botrytis elliptica , also known as Lily blight, lily fire, and botrytis leaf blight. Various viral diseases can cause mottling of leaves and stunting of growth, including lily curl stripe, ringspot, and lily rosette virus. \n\nLilies can be propagated in several ways;\n\nPlant grow regulators (PGRs) are used to limit the height of lilies, especially those sold as potted plants. Commonly used chemicals include ancymidol, fluprimidol, paclobutrazol, and uni-conazole, all of which are applied to the foliage to slow the biosynthesis of gibberellins , a class of plant hormones responsible for stem growth. \n\nA comparison of meiotic crossing-over ( recombination ) in lily and mouse led, in 1977, to the conclusion that diverse eukaryotes share a common pattern of meiotic crossing-over. Lilium longiflorum has been used for studying aspects of the basic molecular mechanism of genetic recombination during meiosis. \n\nSome Lilium species are toxic to cats . This is known to be so especially for Lilium longiflorum , though other Lilium and the unrelated Hemerocallis can also cause the same symptoms with equal lethality. The true mechanism of toxicity is undetermined, but it involves damage to the renal tubular epithelium (composing the substance of the kidney and secreting, collecting, and conducting urine), which can cause acute kidney failure . Veterinary help should be sought, as a matter of urgency, for any cat that is suspected of eating any part of a lily – including licking pollen that may have brushed onto its coat. Due to the high mortality rate, medical care should be sought immediately once it is known a cat came into contact with lilies, ideally before any symptoms develop. \n\nLily bulbs are starchy and edible as root vegetables , though bulbs of some species may be too bitter to eat. \n\nLilium brownii var. viridulum , known as 百合 ( pak hop ; pinyin : bǎi hé ; Cantonese Yale : baak hap ; lit. 'hundred united'), is one of the most prominent edible lilies in China . Its bulbs are large in size and not bitter. They were even exported and sold in the San Francisco Chinatown in the 19th century, available both fresh and dry. A landrace called 龍牙百合 ( pinyin : lóng yá bǎi hé ; lit. 'dragon-tooth lily') mainly cultivated in Hunan and Jiangxi is especially renowned for its good-quality bulbs. \n\nL. lancifolium ( Chinese : 卷丹 ; pinyin : juǎn dān ; lit. 'reflexed red') is widely cultivated in China, especially in Yixing , Huzhou and Longshan . Its bulbs are slightly bitter. \n\nL. davidii var. unicolor ( Chinese : 蘭州百合 ; lit. 'Lanzhou lily') is mainly cultivated in Lanzhou and its bulbs are valued for sweetness. \n\nOther edible Chinese lilies include L. brownii var. brownii , L. davidii var. davidii , L. concolor , L. pensylvanicum , L. distichum , L. martagon var. pilosiusculum , L. pumilum , L. rosthornii and L. speciosum var. gloriosoides . Researchers have also explored the possibility of using ornamental cultivars as edible lilies. \n\nThe dried bulbs are commonly used in the south to flavor soup. [ citation needed ] They may be reconstituted and stir-fried , grated and used to thicken soup , or processed to extract starch. [ citation needed ] Their texture and taste draw comparisons with the potato , although the individual bulb scales are much smaller. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe commonly marketed \"lily\" flower buds, called kam cham tsoi ( Chinese : 金针菜 ; pinyin : jīnzhēncài ; Cantonese Yale : gāmjām choi ; lit. 'gold needle vegetable') in Chinese cuisine , are actually from daylilies , Hemerocallis citrina , or possibly H. fulva . [ a ] Flowers of the H. graminea and Lilium bulbiferum were reported to have been eaten as well, but samples provided by the informant were strictly daylilies and did not include L. bulbiferum . [ b ] \n\nLily flowers and bulbs are eaten especially in the summer, for their perceived ability to reduce internal heat. A 19th century English source reported that \"Lily flowers are also said to be efficacious in pulmonary affections, and to have tonic properties\". \n\nAsiatic lily cultivars are also imported from the Netherlands; the seedling bulbs must be imported from the Netherlands every year. \n\nThe parts of Lilium species which are officially listed as food material in Taiwan are the flower and bulbs of Lilium lancifolium , Lilium brownii var. viridulum , Lilium pumilum and Lilium candidum . \n\nThe lily bulb or yuri-ne is sometimes used in Japanese cuisine. [ c ] It may be most familiar in the present day as an occasional ingredient ( 具 , gu ) in the chawan-mushi (savoury egg custard), where a few loosened scales of this optional ingredient are found embedded in the \"hot pudding\" of each serving. It could also be used as an ingredient in a clear soup or suimono [ ja ] . \n\nThe boiled bulb may also be strained [ d ] into purée for use, as in the sweetened kinton , or chakin-shibori . [ e ]\n\nThere is also the yuri- yōkan , one recipe of which calls for combining measures of yuri starch with agar dissolved in water and sugar. This was a specialty of Hamada, Shimane , and the shop Kaisei-dō ( 開盛堂 ) established in 1885 became famous for it. Because a certain Viscount Jimyōin wrote a waka poem about the confection which mentioned hime-yuri \"princess lily\", [ f ] one source stated that the hime-yuri (usually taken to mean L. concolor ) had to have been used, but another source points out that the city of Hamada lies back to back with across a mountain range with Fuchu, Hiroshima which is renowned for its production of yama-yuri ( L. auratum ). [ g ]\n\nCurrent Japanese governmental sources ( c. 2005 ) list the following lily species as prominent in domestic consumption: the oni yuri or tiger lily Lilium lancifolium , the kooni yuri Lilium leichtlinii var. maximowiczii , [ h ] and the gold-banded white yama-yuri L. auratum .\n\nBut Japanese sources c. 1895–1900, give a top-three list which replaces kooni yuri with the sukashi-yuri ( 透かし百合 , lit. \"see-through lily\", L. maculatum ) named from the gaps between the tepals . \n\nThere is uncertainty regarding which species is meant by the hime-yuri used as food, because although this is usually the common name for L. concolor in most up-to-date literature, it used to ambiguously referred to the tiger lily as well, c. 1895–1900. The non-tiger-lily himeyuri is certainly described as quite palatable in the literature at the time, but the extent of exploitation could not have been as significant. [ i ]\n\nThe flower buds and roots of Lilium columbianum are traditionally gathered and eaten by North American indigenous peoples. Coast Salish , Nuu-chah-nulth and most western Washington peoples steam, boil or pit-cook the bulbs of Lilium columbianum . Bitter or peppery-tasting, they were mostly used as a flavoring, often in soup with meat or fish. \n\nTraditional Chinese medicine list the use of the following: 野百合 Lilium brownii , 百合 Lilium brownii var. viridulum , 渥丹 Lilium concolor , 毛百合 Lilium dauricum , 卷丹 Lilium lancifolium , 山丹 Lilium pumilum , 南川百合 Lilium rosthornii , 药百合 Lilium speciosum var. gloriosoides , 淡黄花百合 Lilium sulphureum . \n\nIn Taiwan, governmental publications list Lilium lancifolium Thunb., Lilium brownii var. viridulum Baker, Lilium pumilum DC. \n\nIn the kanpō or Chinese medicine as practiced in Japan, the official Japanese governmental pharmacopeia Nihon yakkyokuhō ( 日本薬局方 ) includes the use of lily bulb (known as byakugō ( ビャクゴウ 百合 ) in traditional pharmacological circles), listing the use of the following species: Lilium lancifolium , Lilium brownii , Lilium brownii var. colchesteri , Lilium pumilum The scales flaked off from the bulbs are used, usually steamed. \n\nIn South Korea, the lilium species which are officially listed for medicinal use are 참나리 Lilium lancifolium Thunberg; 당나리 Lilium brownii var. viridulun Baker. \n\nIn the Victorian language of flowers , lilies portray love, ardor, and affection for your loved ones, while orange lilies stand for happiness, love, and warmth. \n\nLilies are the flowers most commonly used at funerals, where they symbolically signify that the soul of the deceased has been restored to the state of innocence. \n\nLilium formosanum , or Taiwanese lily, is called \"the flower of broken bowl\" ( Chinese : 打碗花 ) by the elderly members of the Hakka ethnic group. They believe that because this lily grows near bodies of clean water, harming the lily may damage the environment, just like breaking the bowls that people rely on. A different viewpoint proposes that parents discourage kids from picking lilies by informing them of the possible repercussions, like their dinner bowls breaking if they harm the flower. The indigenous Rukai people who call this same species bariangalay consider it as a symbol of bravery and perseverance. \n\nIn Western Christianity, Madonna lily or Lilium candidum has been associated with the Virgin Mary since at least the Medieval Era. Medieval and Renaissance depictions of the Virgin Mary, especially at the Annunciation , often show her with these flowers. Madonna lilies are also commonly included in depictions of Christ's resurrection . Lilium longiflorum , the Easter lily, is a symbol of Easter, and Lilium candidum , the Madonna lily, carries a great deal of symbolic value in many cultures. See the articles for more information.\n\nLilium bulbiferum has long been recognised as a symbol of the Orange Order in Northern Ireland . \n\nLilium mackliniae is the state flower of Manipur . Lilium michauxii , the Carolina lily, is the official state flower of North Carolina . Idyllwild, California , hosts the Lemon Lily Festival, which celebrates Lilium parryi . Lilium philadelphicum is the floral emblem of Saskatchewan province in Canada, and is on the flag of Saskatchewan . \n\nLily of the valley , flame lilies , daylilies , water lilies and spider lilies are symbolically important flowers commonly referred to as lilies, but they are not in the genus Lilium .",
  "Rangelands are grasslands , shrublands , woodlands , wetlands , and deserts that are grazed by domestic livestock or wild animals . Types of rangelands include tallgrass and shortgrass prairies , desert grasslands and shrublands, woodlands, savannas , chaparrals , steppes , and tundras . Rangelands do not include forests lacking grazable understory vegetation, barren desert, farmland , or land covered by solid rock, concrete, or glaciers .\n\nRangelands are distinguished from pasture lands because they grow primarily native vegetation rather than plants established by humans. Rangelands are also managed principally with practices such as managed livestock grazing and prescribed fire rather than more intensive agricultural practices of seeding, irrigation , and the use of fertilizers.\n\nGrazing is an important use of rangelands but the term rangeland is not synonymous with grazingland . Livestock grazing can be used to manage rangelands by harvesting forage to produce livestock, changing plant composition, or reducing fuel loads.\n\nFire is also an essential regulator of range vegetation, whether set by humans or resulting from lightning . Fires tend to reduce the abundance of woody plants and promote herbaceous plants, including grasses, forbs , and grass-like plants . The suppression or reduction of periodic wildfires from desert shrublands, savannas, or woodlands frequently invites the dominance of trees and shrubs to the near exclusion of grasses and forbs . \n\nRangelands cover approximately 80 million square kilometers globally, with 9.5 million square kilometers protected and 67 million square kilometers used for livestock production . These areas sustain about 1 billion animals, managed by pastoralists across over 100 countries, illustrating their crucial role in both ecological conservation and agricultural productivity. \n\nThe United Nations (UN) has declared 2026 the International Year of Rangelands and Pastoralists, with the Food and Agriculture Organization leading the initiative. \n\nThe United States Environmental Protection Agency defines rangeland as \"lands on which the native vegetation (climax or natural potential plant community) is predominantly grasses, grass-like plants, forbs, or shrubs suitable for grazing or browsing use.\" The EPA classifies natural grassland and savannas as rangeland, and in some cases includes wetlands, deserts, tundra, and \"certain forb and shrub communities.\" The primary difference between rangeland and pasture is management; rangelands tend to have natural vegetation along with a few introduced plant species, but all managed by grazing, while pastures have forage that is adapted for livestock and managed, by seeding, mowing, fertilization and irrigation. \n\nAccording to the UNCCD, 35% of rangelands are deserts and xeric shrublands, 26% tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas and shrublands, 15% tundra, 13% temperate grasslands, savannahs and shrublands, 6% montane grasslands and shrublands, 4% mediterranean forests, woodlands and scrub, as well as 1% flooded grasslands and savannahs. \n\nPrairies are considered part of the temperate grasslands, savannas and shrublands biome by ecologists, based on similar temperate climates, moderate rainfall, and grasses, herbs, and shrubs, rather than trees, as the dominant vegetation type . Temperate grassland regions include the Pampas of Argentina , and the steppes of Eurasia .\n\nGrasslands are areas where the vegetation is dominated by grasses ( Poaceae ) and other herbaceous (non-woody) plants. However, sedge ( Cyperaceae ) and rush ( Juncaceae ) families can also be found. Grasslands occur naturally on all continents except Antarctica . In temperate latitudes, such as northwest Europe and the Great Plains and California in North America , native grasslands are dominated by perennial bunch grass species, whereas in warmer climates annual species form a greater component of the vegetation. \n\nSteppe , in physical geography, refers to a biome region characterized by grassland plain without trees apart from those near rivers and lakes. The prairie (especially the shortgrass and mixed prairie ) is an example of a steppe, though it is not usually called such. It may be semi- desert , or covered with grass or shrubs or both, depending on the season and latitude . The term is also used to denote the climate encountered in regions too dry to support a forest , but not dry enough to be a desert.\n\nPampas are the fertile South American lowlands that include the Argentine provinces of Buenos Aires , La Pampa , Santa Fe , Entre Ríos and Córdoba , most of Uruguay , and the State of Rio Grande do Sul , in the southernmost end of Brazil covering more than 750,000 km 2 (289,577 sq mi). These vast plains are only interrupted by the low Ventana and Tandil hills near Bahía Blanca and Tandil (Argentina), with a height of 1,300 m (4,265 ft) and 500 m (1,640 ft) respectively. The climate is mild, with precipitation of 600 mm (23.6 in) to 1,200 mm (47.2 in), more or less evenly distributed through the year, making the soils appropriate for agriculture . This area is also one of the distinct physiography provinces of the larger Paraná-Paraguay Plain division. These plains contain unique wildlife because of the different terrains around it. Some of this wildlife includes the rhea , the badger , and the prairie chicken .\n\nShrubland is a plant community characterized by vegetation dominated by shrubs , often also including grasses , herbs , and geophytes . Shrubland may either occur naturally or be the result of human activity. It may be the mature vegetation type in a particular region and remain stable over time, or a transitional community that occurs temporarily as the result of a disturbance, such as fire. A stable state may be maintained by regular natural disturbance such as fire or browsing . Shrubland may be unsuitable for human habitation because of the danger of fire. The term \"shrubland\" was first coined in 1903. \n\nWoodland is a low-density forest forming open habitats with plenty of sunlight and limited shade. Woodlands may support an understory of shrubs and herbaceous plants including grasses. Woodland may form a transition to shrubland under drier conditions or during early stages of primary or secondary succession. Higher densities and areas of trees, with largely closed canopy, provide extensive and nearly continuous shade are referred to as forest.\n\nSavanna is a grassland ecosystem characterized by the trees being sufficiently small or widely spaced so that the canopy does not close. The open canopy allows sufficient light to reach the ground to support an unbroken herbaceous layer consisting primarily of C4 grasses . \n\nDesert is a landscape or region that receives an extremely low amount of precipitation , defined as areas with an average annual precipitation of less than 250 millimetres (10 in) per year, or as areas where more water is lost by evapotranspiration than falls as precipitation. In the Köppen climate classification system, deserts are classed as BWh (hot desert) or BWk (temperate desert). In the Thornthwaite climate classification system, deserts would be classified as arid megathermal climates. \n\nTundra is a biome where the tree growth is hindered by low temperatures and short growing seasons. The term tundra comes through Russian тундра from the Kildin Sami word tūndâr \"uplands,\" \"treeless mountain tract.\" There are three types of tundra: Arctic tundra, alpine tundra , and Antarctic tundra In tundra, the vegetation is composed of dwarf shrubs , sedges and grasses , mosses , and lichens . Scattered trees grow in some tundra. The ecotone (or ecological boundary region) between the tundra and the forest is known as the tree line or timberline.\n\nRangelands produce a wide variety of goods and services desired by society, including livestock forage ( Grazing ), wildlife habitat, water , mineral resources , wood products , wildland recreation , open space and natural beauty. The geographic extent and many important resources of rangelands make their proper use and management vitally important to people everywhere. \n\nRangelands are vital economic assets, contributing substantially to national economies , particularly through livestock production . For instance, in Ethiopia , rangelands account for 19% of the national GDP , while in Brazil , they contribute one-third of the agribusiness GDP through cattle farming. These vast areas not only support direct agricultural outputs but also bolster related industries, enhancing employment and promoting economic growth. Their management and sustainability are crucial for continuing these economic contributions and supporting the livelihoods dependent on them. \n\nThe degradation of Earth's extensive rangelands due to overuse, inappropriate cultivation, misuse, climate change , and biodiversity loss represents a significant threat to humanity's food supply and the well-being or survival of billions of people.\n\nIn 2024, the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) reported that up to 50% of rangelands are degraded. These areas suffer from reduced soil fertility , woody encroachment , erosion , salinization , alkalinization , and soil compaction , which all inhibit plant growth and contribute to drought and fluctuations in precipitation. This degradation is primarily driven by the conversion of pastures to cropland , urban expansion , increasing demands for food, fiber, and fuel, excessive grazing , abandonment by pastoralists, and policies that incentivize overexploitation . The UNCCD observes that the loss of rangeland attracts little public attention and rarely features in international policy discussions. \n\nRangelands cover up to 8 billion hectares of land globally and therewith 54% of the terrestrial surface. 78% of rangelands occur in drylands. \n\nRangeland is a prominent feature of rural Canada . A provincial jurisdiction, administration and policy regarding range use varies across the country. As in many other Commonwealth countries, public tenures on crown land for the purpose of range activities are common in geographically compatible areas. Reconciling the economic needs of ranchers and the need for environmental conservation is one of the primary themes in modern range discourse.\n\nIn western Canada, both grassland and forested range are significant. In British Columbia, 70 percent of grassland range is privately owned and 60 percent of the total annual livestock forage requirement is provided by grazing on Crown rangeland (34 million hectares), 80 percent of which is forested range. Grassland range predominates in much of the prairie provinces’ ranching area; however, forested range is particularly important in the boreal region. \n\nCertain rangelands are preserved as provincially-protected areas similar to parks, others are managed as community resources. For example, in Alberta since 2003 there has been legislation allowing the creation of \"Heritage Rangelands\" within the parks system. As of 2012 there were 2 heritage rangelands and 6 proposed future heritage rangelands run by Alberta Parks . There are also 32 provincial grazing reserves located throughout Alberta administered as public lands by Alberta Sustainable Resource Development . The federal government has administered several \"Community Pastures\" in Western Canada that were reclaimed lands suffering erosion during the 1930s. In 2012, it was announced that this federal involvement would be phased out over a six-year period. \n\nOf the land within the United States borders, 36% is considered rangeland. The western side of the United States is 53% rangeland. Around 399 million acres (1,610,000 km 2 ) of rangeland are privately owned. The Bureau of Land Management manages about 167 million acres (676,000 km 2 ) of publicly owned rangeland, with the United States Forest Service managing approximately 95 million acres (380,000 km 2 ) more. Ranchers may lease portions of this public rangeland and pay a fee based on the number and type of livestock and the period for which they are on the land.\n\nHistorically much of the land in the western United States was used for grazing and much of some states still is. In many of those states, such as Arizona, an open-range law applies which requires a land owner to fence cattle out rather than in; thus cattle are theoretically allowed to roam free. In modern times open-range laws can conflict with urban development as occasional stray cows, bulls, or even herds wander into subdivisions or onto highways. \n\nAustralia’s rangelands extend from tropical savannas in the north dominated by summer rainfall, though large areas of desert in central Australia to the southern rangelands dominated by winter rainfall. They cover approximately 80 per cent of the Australian continent and equate broadly with the ‘ Outback ’. However, rangelands also occur in higher rainfall areas where limitations other than rainfall restrict use to management of the natural landscape. The rangelands are where values and societal benefits are based primarily on natural resources. They are areas which have not been intensively developed for agriculture but extensive livestock production is a major land use, accounting for 55 per cent of the rangelands. Conservation reserves utilise around 11 per cent of the rangelands and the rangelands have areas of significant biodiversity and natural attractions on a world scale. Although mining and petroleum extraction uses a very small percentage of the rangelands, it economically contributes most to Australia’s Gross Domestic Product compared with other rangeland industries (cattle, sheep and goat production, tourism, harvesting of native products). Indigenous land tenures of various types cover around 59 per cent of the rangelands and overlap with grazing and conservation uses. Although rangelands cover 80 per cent of Australia’s land mass, at the 2016 Census, they were home to just over two per cent of the population (394,000 people), with 28 per cent of rangeland residents identifying as being Indigenous. \n\nRangelands in South America are located in regions with climate ranging from arid to sub-humid. Annual precipitation in these areas ranges from approximately 150 to 1500 mm (6–60 inches). Within South America, rangelands cover about 33% of the total land area. South American rangelands include; grasslands, shrublands, savannas, and hot and cold deserts. Rangelands in South America exclude hyperarid deserts. Examples of the South American rangelands include the Patagonian Steppe, the Monte, the Pampas, the \"Llanos\" or \"Cerrado,\" the \"Chaco\" and the \"Caatinga.\"\nThe change in the intensity and location of tropical thunderstorms and other weather patterns is the driving force in the climates of southern South America.\n\nIn Kenya , rangelands make up for 85% of the land surface area, and are largely inhabited by nomadic pastoralists who are largely dependent on livestock. This movement often brings along an incursion of different diseases with the common one being the rinderpest virus in the Kenyan wildlife population from the Somali ecosystem.\n\nIn the past, rangelands in western China supported a pastoral economy and large wildlife populations. Now the rangelands have shrunk due to population growth, economic, government, and social factors. Rangeland types in China include; Semi-desert, Dry Alpine Grasslands, Alpine Dwarf Shrub, Wetland types.",
  "Michael Haneke ( German: [ˈhaːnəkə] ; born 23 March 1942) is an Austrian film director and screenwriter. His work often examines social issues and depicts the feelings of estrangement experienced by individuals in modern society. Haneke has made films in French, German, and English and has worked in television and theatre. He also teaches film direction at the Film Academy Vienna .\n\nHaneke's first films were his \"glaciation\" trilogy, consisting of The Seventh Continent (1989), Benny's Video (1992), and 71 Fragments of a Chronology of Chance (1994), each of which depict a \"coldly bureaucratic society in which genuine human relationships have been supplanted by a deep-seated collective malaise\" and explore \"the relationship among consumerism , violence, mass media, and contemporary alienation\". He went on to win the Cannes Film Festival 's Grand Prix for The Piano Teacher (2001) as well as its Palme d'Or twice, for The White Ribbon (2009) and Amour (2012), the latter of which received five Academy Award nominations and won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . He also directed Funny Games (1997) and its 2007 remake , Code Unknown (2000), Time of the Wolf (2003), Caché (2005), and Happy End (2017).\n\nHaneke is the son of German actor and director Fritz Haneke [ de ] and Austrian actress Beatrix von Degenschild [ de ] . His stepfather, the composer Alexander Steinbrecher [ de ] , later married the mother of actor Christoph Waltz . Haneke was raised in the city of Wiener Neustadt , Austria.\n\nHaneke showed a strong interest in literature and music, but as an adolescent developed a \"downright contempt for any form of school\". During this period of his life, he has later described himself as a \"rebel\". He had ambitions of becoming an actor in his youth, later abandoning these plans after failing an entrance examination at the Max Reinhardt Seminar in Vienna. He later attended the University of Vienna to study philosophy , psychology and drama . Not a committed student, he would spend most of his time attending local movie theatres. After leaving university, he began working odd jobs, before working as an editor and dramaturge at the southwestern German television station Südwestfunk from 1967 to 1970, a time during which he also worked as a film critic. He made his debut as a television director in 1974.\n\nHaneke started his career directing numerous television projects. He made his debut as a writer and director with the 1974 television movie After Liverpool starring Hildegard Schmahl [ de ] and Dieter Kirchlechner [ de ] . The project originally started as a radio play. He then directed two more television films, Three Paths to the Lake (1976), about a war photo journalist who faces a moral crisis when she is forced to examine the implications of her work, and another telefilm Sperrmüll (1976). In 1979 he directed two episodes of Lemminge followed by Variation – oder Daß es Utopien gibt, weiß ich selber! (1983). In 1986 he directed Fraulein: A German Melodrama which was described as Haneke's answer to Fassbinder 's The Marriage of Maria Braun . Haneke wanted to make a film about German history that doesn't drown in self-pity and yet still attracts the public\". A few years later he would make the experimental tele-documentary film Nachruf für einen Mörder about a young Austrian who provoked a hideous bloodbath in Vienna. \n\nHaneke's feature film debut was 1989's The Seventh Continent , which served to trace out the violent and bold style that would bloom in later years. The film chronicles the last years of an Austrian family played by Birgit Doll and Dieter Berner. Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian described the film as a \"masterpiece\". Despite being shortlisted for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film it wasn't nominated. Three years later he directed the controversial psychological horror film Benny's Video (1992). The film premiered at the 1992 Cannes Film Festival to positive reviews. It later won the FIPRESCI Award at the European Film Awards . The film showed at the New York Film Festival where Stephen Holden of The New York Times praised the performances and Haneke writing, \"The film makes strong, if heavy-handed, points about the confusing effects of television violence\". His third film in the trilogy is entitled, 71 Fragments of a Chronology of Chance (1994), Manohla Dargis 's The New York Times called it an \"An icy-cool study of violence both mediated and horribly real\", adding \"For Mr. Haneke, the point seems less that evil is commonplace than that we don't engage with it as thinking, actively moral beings. We slurp our soup while Sarajevo burns on the boob tube.\" \n\nIn 1997 he directed the television film The Castle (1997). The project is based of the Franz Kafka 's novel of the same name . The film starred Ulrich Mühe and Susanne Lothar . It premiered at the Berlin International Film Festival . Also that year he directed the feature film Funny Games (1997). The plot involves two young men who hold a family hostage and torture them with sadistic games in their vacation home. The film premiered at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival . David Rooney of Variety wrote about his continuation of the examination of violence writing, \"Haneke is clearly more interested in the implications of violence than the acts themselves, and the psychological wallop they pack is strengthened by having most of the physical and emotional carnage played off-camera\". \n\nHe directed the French film Code Unknown (2000) starring Juliette Binoche . The film revolves around separate storylines which weave and intersect with each other. The film is inspired by the life of the French novelist and war reporter Olivier Weber . The film screened at the 2000 Cannes Film Festival . The New York Times praised Haneke \"as a skillful, minutely observant filmmaker who trusts his audience to be able to put two and two together\" but adds \"Unfortunately, he's often too cryptic, which leaves viewers still trying to make connections when they should already be reacting to the moral lessons implied by them.\" Haneke has directed a number of stage productions in German, which include works by Strindberg , Goethe , and Heinrich von Kleist in Berlin, Munich and Vienna.\n\nHaneke achieved great success with the critically acclaimed French film The Piano Teacher (2001). The film starred Isabelle Huppert as a sexually repressed piano teacher who soon becomes involved with a younger man. The film tackles subjects such as masochism , rape , incest , sexual repression , sexual violence , and the relationships between men and women. It premiered at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival where it received rapturous reviews. It won the prestigious Grand Prize at the festival and also won its stars, Benoît Magimel and Huppert the Best Actor and Actress awards. David Denby of The New Yorker wrote, \"Haneke avoids the sensationalism of movie shockers, even high-class shockers like Hitchcock 's Psycho and Polanski 's Repulsion . There are no expressionist moments in The Piano Teacher —no scenes of longing, no soft-focus dreams or cinematic dreck\". Denby concluded, \"[the film] is a seriously scandalous work, beautifully made, and it deserves a sizable audience that might argue over it, appreciate it—even hate it.\" \n\nA few years later he directed the dystopian drama Time of the Wolf (2003) starring Huppert. The film revolves around a family trying to find their way after a global cataclysm. The film received positive reviews with Scott Foundas of Variety Magazine writing, \"Haneke demonstrates profound insight into the essence of human behavior when all humility is pared away, raw panic and despair are the order of the day, and man becomes more like wolf than man.\" In 2005 Haneke reunited with Juliette Binoche in the psychological thriller Caché after she expressed interest in working with him. Haneke frequently worked with real-life couple Ulrich Mühe and Susanne Lothar – thrice each. The film opened the 2005 Cannes Film Festival to positive reviews. The film involves themes of collective guilt , collective memory and colonialism . He incorporated stories of the Paris massacre of 1961 into the film. Haneke won the Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director for the film. It was also included in the BBC's 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century . \n\nIn 2006 he gave his debut as an opera director, staging Mozart's Don Giovanni for the Opéra National de Paris at Palais Garnier when the theater's general manager was Gerard Mortier . With his next film The White Ribbon (2009) Haneke chose to shoot in black-and-white and in Germany. The film is set in 1913 and deals with strange incidents in a small town in Northern Germany , depicting an authoritarian , fascist -like atmosphere, where children are subjected to rigid rules and suffer harsh punishments, and where strange deaths occur. The film premiered at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival and won his first Palme d'Or . It later won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film and earned two Academy Award nominations for Best International Feature Film and Best Cinematography losing to The Secret in Their Eyes (2009) from Argentina and Avatar (2009). Critic Roger Ebert described the film as \"visual[ly] masterful\" adding, \"His films are like parables, teaching that bad things sometimes happen simply because they...happen. The universe laughs at man's laws and does what it will.\" \n\nIn 2012, Haneke directed Amour starring Jean-Louis Trintignant , Emmanuelle Riva and Isabelle Huppert. The film revolves around an elderly couple aging together. The film premiered at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival and received the Palme d'Or , Haneke's second. Ella Tayor of NPR praised the film describing it as \"Touching and tragic\" adding \"Haneke implicates us in the full range of human capacity\". The film also earned the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film with Haneke earning Academy Award nominations for Best Director and Best Original Screenplay , the later nominations being the first of his career. \n\nIn 2012, he was to direct Così fan tutte for the New York City Opera . This production had originally been commissioned by Jürgen Flimm for the Salzburg Festival 2009, but Haneke had to resign due to an illness preventing him from preparing the work. Haneke realized this production at Madrid's Teatro Real in 2013. In 2013, he was the subject of the documentary film Michael H – Profession: Director . That year, Haneke won the Prince of Asturias Award for the arts.\n\nIn 2017, for his twelfth film, Happy End Haneke reunited with Trintignant and Huppert. The film also starred Mathieu Kassovitz and Toby Jones . The film centers around a bourgeois French family dealing with a series of setbacks and crises. The film was nominated for the Palme d'Or at the 70th Cannes Film Festival . The film received respectable reviews. Alissa Wilkinson of Vox described it as a commentary on \"the European refugee crisis and the pitfalls of privilege \". Wilkinson added, \" challenges its audience to pay attention to put together the story, then, is as much an aesthetic statement about how to watch a movie as a political one. We have to observe and see what's in the background. And that's just what the family at the center of the movie doesn't do, and what makes them civilized monsters — a proclivity they pass on through generations.\" \n\nHaneke says that films should offer viewers more space for imagination and self-reflection. Films that have too much detail and moral clarity, Haneke says, are used for mindless consumption by their viewers. Haneke teaches film direction at the Film Academy Vienna . One of his students there was director Katharina Mückstein . \n\nHaneke is known for directing films which are often unsentimental and uses disturbing imagery to explore social critiques on issues such as class , race , gender , and violence . The Museum of Modern Art showcased his films in 2007 adding that they feature themes \"of alienation and social collapse; the exploitation and consumption of violence; the bourgeois family as the incubator of fascistic impulse; individual responsibility and collective guilt ; and the ethics of the photographic image \". He is also known for his use of the long take rather than relying on quick edits or fast paced editing. Haneke prefers to let his scenes unfold slowly, allowing the audience to fully experience the tension and emotion of each moment. This creates a sense of intimacy for the audience to draw them into a scene. He also uses static shots, ambiguous endings, meta-narratives, and silence. Haneke also has collaborated with Isabelle Huppert and Juliette Binoche on numerous films. \n\nIn 2012, Haneke participated in the Sight & Sound poll and submitted these films as his favorite. \n\nIn June 2024, Haneke's list of all-time favorite films was published on LaCinetek [ fr ] . He lists more than 100 films, quoting several works by directors Ingmar Bergman ( Persona , Through a Glass Darkly , Winter Light , The Silence , Scenes from a Marriage ) and Abbas Kiarostami ( Where Is the Friend's House? , Through the Olive Trees , And Life Goes On , Taste of Cherry , The Wind Will Carry Us ).\n\nHis directorial debut , The Seventh Continent , won the Bronze Leopard at the Locarno International Film Festival in 1989. He later won the Grand Prix at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival for The Piano Teacher and the Best Director Award for Caché at the 2005 Cannes Film Festival . He subsequently directed the 2007 remake of his controversial 1997 film Funny Games .\n\nAt the 2009 Cannes Film Festival , his film The White Ribbon won the Palme d'Or , and at the 67th Golden Globe Awards the film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film . In 2012, his film Amour premiered and competed at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival . The film would go on to win the Palme d'Or , making it his second win of the prestigious award in three years; this made him the seventh director to have won it twice and the only Austrian director to have accomplished this. The film received five Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture , Best Director , Best Original Screenplay , and Best Actress in a Leading Role for Emmanuelle Riva ; it won in the category of Best Foreign Language Film .\n\nIn 2013, Haneke won the Prince of Asturias Award for the arts. His twelfth and most recent film, Happy End , was nominated for the Palme d'Or at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival .",
  "The Zwiefacher ( German pronunciation: [ˈtsviːfaxɐ] ) is a southern German folk dance with a quick tempo and changing beat patterns.\n\nThe Zwiefacher is danced primarily in Bavaria , especially Lower Bavaria , Hallertau , and Upper Palatinate ; it is also known in the Black Forest , Austria , Alsace , the Czech Republic , and Sudetenland .\n\nThe first documented use of the word Zwiefach was in 1780. It loosely translates as \"two times\" or \"double\". Although this may be indicative of the two different time signatures, the title may refer to the couple being tightly wound against each other, a departure from earlier traditions. The dance is still known by various other names in different regions, such as Schweinauer , Schleifer , Übern Fuaß , Mischlich , Grad und Ungrad , Neu-Bayerischer and, above all Bairischer (meaning \"Farmer Dance\", a name sometimes confused with the Bavarian polka ).\n\nThe number of different names for the same dance should not be surprising, as the dance is older than the modern German language. Neither should one be surprised that the tunes themselves have multiple names. One German dance researcher, Felix Hoerburger, catalogued 112 different Zwiefacher tunes with 474 different names. \n\nThe Zwiefacher alternates between odd and even time signatures , changing from three to two beats per bar. The changes may occur regularly - for example, two measures per time signature, may change only once or may change irregularly throughout. Early Zwiefachers were played before the modern bar line was invented.\n\nThe couple turns very quickly in a closed position, similar to the waltz . Physically, the rhythmic shift looks like a change from normal waltz steps to Dreher steps (pivots), occasionally also to polka steps.\n\nLyrics were often created as a mnemonic device to help learn Zwiefachers melodies by heart. This led to many songtexts for the same melodies. New lyrics are still sometimes used together with old melodies, as in the McDonald's parody \"Hunger kriag I glei\" by \"Bayrisch-Diatonischer Jodelwahnsinn\", which uses the same music as the \"Suserl-Zwiefache\".",
  "A chokehold , choke , stranglehold or, in Judo , shime-waza ( Japanese : 絞技 , lit. 'constriction technique') is a general term for a grappling hold that critically reduces or prevents either air ( choking ) or blood ( strangling ) from passing through the neck of an opponent. The restriction may be of one or both and depends on the hold used and the reaction of the victim. While the time it takes for the choke to render an opponent unconscious varies depending on the type of choke, the average across all has been recorded as 9 seconds. \n\nThe lack of blood or air often leads to unconsciousness or even death if the hold is maintained. Chokeholds are used in martial arts , combat sports , self-defense , law enforcement and in military hand to hand combat applications. They are considered superior to brute-force manual strangling , which generally requires a large disparity in physical strength to be effective. Rather than using the fingers or arms to attempt to crush the neck, chokeholds effectively use leverage such as figure-four holds or collar holds that use the clothes to assist in the constriction.\n\nThe terminology used varies; in most martial arts , the term \"chokehold\" or \"choke\" is used for all types of grappling holds that strangle. This can be misleading as most holds aim to strangle not choke with the exception of \"air chokes\" (choking means \"to have severe difficulty in breathing because of a constricted or obstructed throat or a lack of air\" ). In Judo terminology, \"blood chokes\" are referred to as \"strangleholds\" or \"strangles\" while \"air chokes\" are called \"chokeholds\" or \"chokes\". In forensics , the terms \"strangle\" and \"stranglehold\" designate any type of neck compression, while in law-enforcement they are referred to as \"neck holds\". \n\nAn air choke (or tracheal choke) specifically refers to a \"true\" choke that compresses the upper airway ( trachea , larynx or laryngopharynx ), hence interfering with breathing and leading to asphyxia . Although less effective at inducing unconsciousness than its vascular counterpart, the air choke causes excruciating pain and air hunger , and in combat sports a fighter will usually yield to such a submission hold. Air chokes have been associated with fractures of the larynx or hyoid bone , and are considered less safe than blood chokes to practice. [ citation needed ]\n\nBlood chokes (also known as sleeper holds or carotid restraints) are a form of strangulation that compress one or both carotid arteries and/or the jugular veins without compressing the airway, hence causing cerebral ischemia and a temporary hypoxic condition in the brain. Compared to strangulation with the hands, properly applied blood chokes require little physical strength.\n\nMost chokeholds featured in combat sports and martial arts are blood chokes, although some air chokes or combinations occur as well. Blood chokes, especially the rear naked choke , triangle chokes , or gi chokes, are commonly used as submission holds in Brazilian jiu-jitsu . In judo , chokeholds, known as shime-waza, are often subject to restrictions based on age or rank. Chokeholds are not allowed in sport sambo but are allowed in combat sambo. The chokeholds used in catch wrestling and shoot wrestling are the inspiration for the \"chokeholds\" in modern professional wrestling performances. Due to the effectiveness of chokeholds and their popularity in a wide variety of martial arts, they are most often used to force submissions in mixed martial art and submission grappling competitions.\n\nSome martial arts include instruction on kappo , resuscitation techniques to heal a fighter choked to unconsciousness.\n\nIn law enforcement the goal is to force an uncooperative subject to submit without causing death or permanent injury. In this situation it is vital to distinguish between air and blood chokes. A hold that simultaneously blocks both the left and right carotid arteries results in cerebral ischemia and loss of consciousness within seconds. If properly applied, the hold produces almost immediate cessation of resistance. However to avoid injury the hold cannot be maintained more than a few seconds. When pressure on the carotids is released, the flow of oxygenated blood resumes immediately and consciousness slowly returns. In contrast, if the airway rather than the carotid arteries is blocked, the subject cannot breathe, but his brain is still perfused with blood and he will remain conscious and may continue to struggle for a minute or more; he will lose consciousness only when the oxygen in the circulating blood is consumed and he collapses from hypoxia. Even if the hold is released at this point, the blood circulating through the brain contains no oxygen, and consequently the subject may not regain consciousness or resume spontaneous breathing. Possibly the most important element of training for the use of chokeholds in law enforcement is the understanding that the subject should always be able to breathe freely. The operator uses his right arm to compress both sides of the subject's neck, assisted by the pressure of his left hand, while his elbow, sharply flexed and centered over the midline, places no pressure on the trachea. \n\nFollowing a series of choking deaths , the Los Angeles Police Department banned chokeholds in 1980, and was soon followed by police departments nationwide. Choking suspects was widely banned by American police departments by the early 1990s, when New York City strengthened the force of an earlier ban on chokeholds. (It is also forensically known as a \"carotid sleeper\".) \n\nDespite the ban, in 2014, NYPD police killed Eric Garner by administering the prohibited hold. Garner was assaulted on suspicions of selling cigarettes without tax stamps, although he was not doing so. While being in the chokehold and restrained by multiple officers, he repeated the words \" I can't breathe \" 11 times while lying face down on the sidewalk. Garner lost consciousness and died approximately an hour later; his autopsy revealed that his death was a result of \"[compression] of neck, compression of chest and prone positioning during physical restraint by police.\" His death and quote became a prominent factor of Black Lives Matter protests, a social movement originating in 2013 and becoming most popular during the George Floyd protests in 2020 following his murder by Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin . In response, the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act of 2021 was introduced, part of its statutes including prohibiting federal police officers from using chokeholds or other carotid holds , along with state and local law enforcement agencies that receive federal funding. \n\nOne powerful way to grasp the arms together when doing front headlocks is the Gable grip . Named after wrestler Dan Gable , it involves clasping the hands together, palm to palm, at a ninety degree angle, with thumbs tucked in.",
  "Cable television is a system of delivering television programming to consumers via radio frequency (RF) signals transmitted through coaxial cables , or in more recent systems, light pulses through fibre-optic cables . This contrasts with broadcast television , in which the television signal is transmitted over-the-air by radio waves and received by a television antenna , or satellite television , in which the television signal is transmitted over-the-air by radio waves from a communications satellite and received by a satellite dish on the roof. FM radio programming, high-speed Internet , telephone services , and similar non-television services may also be provided through these cables. Analog television was standard in the 20th century, but since the 2000s, cable systems have been upgraded to digital cable operation.\n\nA cable channel (sometimes known as a cable network ) is a television network available via cable television. Many of the same channels are distributed through satellite television . Alternative terms include non-broadcast channel or programming service , the latter being mainly used in legal contexts. The abbreviation CATV is used in the US for cable television and originally stood for community antenna television , from cable television's origins in 1948; in areas where over-the-air TV reception was limited by distance from transmitters or mountainous terrain, large community antennas were constructed, and cable was run from them to individual homes.\n\nIn 1968, 6.4% of Americans had cable television. The number increased to 7.5% in 1978. By 1988, 52.8% of all households were using cable. The number further increased to 62.4% in 1994. \n\nTo receive cable television at a given location, cable distribution lines must be available on the local utility poles or underground utility lines. Coaxial cable brings the signal to the customer's building through a service drop , an overhead or underground cable. If the subscriber's building does not have a cable service drop, the cable company will install one. The standard cable used in the U.S. is RG-6 , which has a 75 ohm impedance , and connects with a type F connector . The cable company's portion of the wiring usually ends at a distribution box on the building exterior, and built-in cable wiring in the walls usually distributes the signal to jacks in different rooms to which televisions are connected. Multiple cables to different rooms are split off the incoming cable with a small device called a splitter . There are two standards for cable television; older analog cable, and newer digital cable which can carry data signals used by digital television receivers such as high-definition television (HDTV) equipment. All cable companies in the United States have switched to or are in the course of switching to digital cable television since it was first introduced in the late 1990s.\n\nMost cable companies require a set-top box ( cable converter box ) or a slot on one's TV set for conditional access module cards to view their cable channels, even on newer televisions with digital cable QAM tuners, because most digital cable channels are now encrypted, or scrambled , to reduce cable service theft . A cable from the jack in the wall is attached to the input of the box, and an output cable from the box is attached to the television, usually the RF-IN or composite input on older TVs. Since the set-top box only decodes the single channel that is being watched, each television in the house requires a separate box. Some unencrypted channels, usually traditional over-the-air broadcast networks, can be displayed without a receiver box. The cable company will provide set-top boxes based on the level of service a customer purchases, from basic set-top boxes with a standard-definition picture connected through the standard coaxial connection on the TV, to high-definition wireless digital video recorder (DVR) receivers connected via HDMI or component . Older analog television sets are cable ready and can receive the old analog cable without a set-top box. To receive digital cable channels on an analog television set, even unencrypted ones, requires a different type of box, a digital television adapter supplied by the cable company or purchased by the subscriber. Another new distribution method that takes advantage of the low cost high quality DVB distribution to residential areas, uses TV gateways to convert the DVB-C , DVB-C2 stream to IP for distribution of TV over IP network in the home. Many cable companies offer internet access through DOCSIS . \n\nIn the most common system, multiple television channels (as many as 500, although this varies depending on the provider's available channel capacity) are distributed to subscriber residences through a coaxial cable , which comes from a trunkline supported on utility poles originating at the cable company's local distribution facility, called the headend . Many channels can be transmitted through one coaxial cable by a technique called frequency division multiplexing . At the headend, each television channel is translated to a different frequency . By giving each channel a different frequency slot on the cable, the separate television signals do not interfere with each other. At an outdoor cable box on the subscriber's residence, the company's service drop cable is connected to cables distributing the signal to different rooms in the building. At each television, the subscriber's television or a set-top box provided by the cable company translates the desired channel back to its original frequency ( baseband ), and it is displayed onscreen. Due to widespread cable theft in earlier analog systems, the signals are typically encrypted on modern digital cable systems, and the set-top box must be activated by an activation code sent by the cable company before it will function, which is only sent after the subscriber signs up. If the subscriber fails to pay their bill, the cable company can send a signal to deactivate the subscriber's box, preventing reception.\n\nThere are also usually upstream channels on the cable to send data from the customer box to the cable headend, for advanced features such as requesting pay-per-view shows or movies, cable internet access , and cable telephone service . The downstream channels occupy a band of frequencies from approximately 50 MHz to 1 GHz, while the upstream channels occupy frequencies of 5 to 42 MHz. Subscribers pay with a monthly fee. Subscribers can choose from several levels of service, with premium packages including more channels but costing a higher rate. At the local headend, the feed signals from the individual television channels are received by dish antennas from communication satellites . Additional local channels, such as local broadcast television stations, educational channels from local colleges, and community access channels devoted to local governments ( PEG channels) are usually included on the cable service. Commercial advertisements for local business are also inserted in the programming at the headend (the individual channels, which are distributed nationally, also have their own nationally oriented commercials).\n\nModern cable systems are large, with a single network and headend often serving an entire metropolitan area . Most systems use hybrid fiber-coaxial (HFC) distribution; this means the trunklines that carry the signal from the headend to local neighborhoods are optical fiber to provide greater bandwidth and also extra capacity for future expansion. At the headend, the electrical signal is translated into an optical signal and sent through the fiber. The fiber trunkline goes to several distribution hubs , from which multiple fibers fan out to carry the signal to boxes called optical nodes in local communities. At the optical node, the optical signal is translated back into an electrical signal and carried by coaxial cable distribution lines on utility poles, from which cables branch out to a series of signal amplifiers and line extenders. These devices carry the signal to customers via passive RF devices called taps.\n\nThe very first cable networks were operated locally, notably in 1936 by Rediffusion in London in the United Kingdom and the same year in Berlin in Germany, notably for the Olympic Games , and from 1948 onwards in the United States and Switzerland. This type of local cable network was mainly used to relay terrestrial channels in geographical areas poorly served by terrestrial television signals. \n\nCable television began in the United States as a commercial business in 1950s.\n\nThe early systems simply received weak ( broadcast ) channels, amplified them, and sent them over unshielded wires to the subscribers, limited to a community or to adjacent communities. The receiving antenna would be taller than any individual subscriber could afford, thus bringing in stronger signals; in hilly or mountainous terrain it would be placed at a high elevation.\n\nAt the outset, cable systems only served smaller communities without television stations of their own, and which could not easily receive signals from stations in cities because of distance or hilly terrain. In Canada, however, communities with their own signals were fertile cable markets, as viewers wanted to receive American signals. Rarely, as in the college town of Alfred, New York , U.S. cable systems retransmitted Canadian channels.\n\nAlthough early ( VHF ) television receivers could receive 12 channels (2–13), the maximum number of channels that could be broadcast in one city was 7: channels 2, 4, either 5 or 6, 7, 9, 11 and 13, as receivers at the time were unable to receive strong (local) signals on adjacent channels without distortion. (There were frequency gaps between 4 and 5, and between 6 and 7, which allowed both to be used in the same city).\n\nAs equipment improved, all twelve channels could be utilized, except where a local VHF television station broadcast. Local broadcast channels were not usable for signals deemed to be a priority, but technology allowed low-priority signals to be placed on such channels by synchronizing their blanking intervals . TVs were unable to reconcile these blanking intervals and the slight changes due to travel through a medium, causing ghosting . The bandwidth of the amplifiers also was limited, meaning frequencies over 250 MHz were difficult to transmit to distant portions of the coaxial network, and UHF channels could not be used at all. To expand beyond 12 channels, non-standard midband channels had to be used, located between the FM band and Channel 7, or superband beyond Channel 13 up to about 300 MHz; these channels initially were only accessible using separate tuner boxes that sent the chosen channel into the TV set on Channel 2, 3 or 4. [ citation needed ] Initially, UHF broadcast stations were at a disadvantage because the standard TV sets in use at the time were unable to receive their channels. With the passage of the All-Channel Receiver Act in 1964, all new television sets were required to include a UHF tuner, nonetheless, it would still take a few years for UHF stations to become competitive.\n\nBefore being added to the cable box itself, these midband channels were used for early incarnations of pay TV , e.g. The Z Channel (Los Angeles) and HBO but transmitted in the clear i.e. not scrambled as standard TV sets of the period could not pick up the signal nor could the average consumer de-tune the normal stations to be able to receive it.\n\nOnce tuners that could receive select mid-band and super-band channels began to be incorporated into standard television sets, broadcasters were forced to either install scrambling circuitry or move these signals further out of the range of reception for early cable-ready TVs and VCRs. However, once consumer sets had the ability to receive all 181 FCC allocated channels, premium broadcasters were left with no choice but to scramble.\n\nThe descrambling circuitry was often published in electronics hobby magazines such as Popular Science and Popular Electronics allowing anybody with anything more than a rudimentary knowledge of broadcast electronics to be able to build their own and receive the programming without cost.\n\nLater, the cable operators began to carry FM radio stations, and encouraged subscribers to connect their FM stereo sets to cable. Before stereo and bilingual TV sound became common, Pay-TV channel sound was added to the FM stereo cable line-ups. About this time, operators expanded beyond the 12-channel dial to use the midband and superband VHF channels adjacent to the high band 7–13 of North American television frequencies . Some operators as in Cornwall, Ontario , used a dual distribution network with Channels 2–13 on each of the two cables.\n\nDuring the 1980s, United States regulations not unlike public, educational, and government access (PEG) created the beginning of cable-originated live television programming. As cable penetration increased, numerous cable-only TV stations were launched, many with their own news bureaus that could provide more immediate and more localized content than that provided by the nearest network newscast.\n\nSuch stations may use similar on-air branding as that used by the nearby broadcast network affiliate, but the fact that these stations do not broadcast over the air and are not regulated by the FCC, their call signs are meaningless. These stations evolved partially into today's over-the-air digital subchannels, where a main broadcast TV station e.g. NBC 37* would – in the case of no local CBS or ABC station being available – rebroadcast the programming from a nearby affiliate but fill in with its own news and other community programming to suit its own locale. Many live local programs with local interests were subsequently created all over the United States in most major television markets in the early 1980s.\n\nThis evolved into today's many cable-only broadcasts of diverse programming, including cable-only produced television movies and miniseries . Cable specialty channels , starting with channels oriented to show movies and large sporting or performance events, diversified further, and narrowcasting became common. By the late 1980s, cable-only signals outnumbered broadcast signals on cable systems, some of which by this time had expanded beyond 35 channels. By the mid-1980s in Canada, cable operators were allowed by the regulators to enter into distribution contracts with cable networks on their own.\n\nBy the 1990s, tiers became common, with customers able to subscribe to different tiers to obtain different selections of additional channels above the basic selection. By subscribing to additional tiers, customers could get specialty channels, movie channels, and foreign channels. Large cable companies used addressable descramblers to limit access to premium channels for customers not subscribing to higher tiers, however the above magazines often published workarounds for that technology as well.\n\nDuring the 1990s, the pressure to accommodate the growing array of offerings resulted in digital transmission that made more efficient use of the VHF signal capacity; fibre optics was common to carry signals into areas near the home, where coax could carry higher frequencies over the short remaining distance. Although for a time in the 1980s and 1990s, television receivers and VCRs were equipped to receive the mid-band and super-band channels. Because the descrambling circuitry was for a time present in these tuners, depriving the cable operator of much of their revenue, such cable-ready tuners are rarely used now – requiring a return to the set-top boxes used from the 1970s onward.\n\nThe digital television transition in the United States has put all signals, broadcast and cable, into digital form, rendering analog cable television service a rarity, found in an ever-dwindling number of markets. Analog television sets are accommodated, their tuners mostly obsolete and dependent entirely on the set-top box.\n\nCable television is mostly available in North America , Europe , Australia , Asia and South America . Cable television has had little success in Africa , as it is not cost-effective to lay cables in sparsely populated areas. Multichannel multipoint distribution service , a microwave-based system, may be used instead.\n\nCoaxial cables are capable of bi-directional carriage of signals as well as the transmission of large amounts of data . Cable television signals use only a portion of the bandwidth available over coaxial lines. This leaves plenty of space available for other digital services such as cable internet , cable telephony and wireless services, using both unlicensed and licensed spectra. Broadband internet access is achieved over coaxial cable by using cable modems to convert the network data into a type of digital signal that can be transferred over coaxial cable. One problem with some cable systems is the older amplifiers placed along the cable routes are unidirectional thus in order to allow for uploading of data the customer would need to use an analog telephone modem to provide for the upstream connection. This limited the upstream speed to 31.2 Kbp/s and prevented the always-on convenience broadband internet typically provides. Many large cable systems have upgraded or are upgrading their equipment to allow for bi-directional signals, thus allowing for greater upload speed and always-on convenience, though these upgrades are expensive.\n\nIn North America , Australia and Europe , many cable operators have already introduced cable telephone service, which operates just like existing fixed line operators. This service involves installing a special telephone interface at the customer's premises that converts the analog signals from the customer's in-home wiring into a digital signal, which is then sent on the local loop (replacing the analog last mile , or plain old telephone service (POTS) to the company's switching center, where it is connected to the public switched telephone network ( PSTN ). The biggest obstacle to cable telephone service is the need for nearly 100% reliable service for emergency calls. One of the standards available for digital cable telephony, PacketCable , seems to be the most promising and able to work with the quality of service (QOS) demands of traditional analog plain old telephone service (POTS) service. The biggest advantage to digital cable telephone service is similar to the advantage of digital cable, namely that data can be compressed, resulting in much less bandwidth used than a dedicated analog circuit-switched service. Other advantages include better voice quality and integration to a Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) network providing cheap or unlimited nationwide and international calling. In many cases, digital cable telephone service is separate from cable modem service being offered by many cable companies and does not rely on Internet Protocol (IP) traffic or the Internet.\n\nTraditional cable television providers and traditional telecommunication companies increasingly compete in providing voice, video and data services to residences. The combination of television, telephone and Internet access is commonly called triple play , regardless of whether CATV or telcos offer it.\n\n1 More than 400,000 television service subscribers.",
  "Cross-laminated timber ( CLT ) is a subcategory of engineered wood panel product made from gluing together at least three layers of solid-sawn lumber at angles to each other. It is similar to plywood but with distinctively thicker laminations (or lamellae).\n\nThe grain of each layer of boards is usually rotated 90 degrees from that of adjacent layers and glued on the wide faces of each board, usually in a symmetric way so that the outer layers have the same orientation . An odd number of layers is most common, but there are configurations with even numbers as well (which are then arranged to give a symmetric configuration). Regular timber is an anisotropic material, meaning that the physical properties change depending on the direction at which the force is applied. By gluing layers of wood at right angles, the panel is able to achieve better structural rigidity in both directions.\n\nCLT is distinct from glued laminated timber (known as glulam), which is a product with all laminations orientated in the same way. \n\nThe first patent resembling CLT was first developed in the 1920s by Frank J. Walsh and Robert L. Watts in Tacoma, Washington. Many sources however, date the first patent back to 1985 when it was patented in France. Significant developments were then made in Austria when Gerhard Schickhofer presented his PhD thesis research on CLT in 1994. Utilizing the theories he developed during his research, Schickhofer began working with three small sawmills and the Sawmillers Association, to start production of CLT. With help from some government funding, they were able to hand build a test CLT press and create the first few panels. At the same time, the first press system, utilizing water-based pressure, came on the market enabling Schickhofer and his team to think beyond the capabilities originally thought possible for CLT. After years of extensive research, Schickofer submitted the results to the Austrian and EU government bodies that dealt with the approval of materials for commercial products and in December 1998 it was approved. A period of substantial growth in production and projects soon followed in Germany and other European countries as a push for green buildings became more prominent. CLT was slow to take off in North America, but it has begun to gain momentum in more recent years. \n\nIn 2002, Austria used Schickhofer's research to create the first national CLT guidelines. The International European Technical Assessments (ETA) began to regulate the properties and design of CLT in 2006. Efforts to standardize CLT in Europe started in 2008 and by 2015 the first European product standard for CLT, EN 16351, was approved. Also in 2015, CLT was incorporated into the International Building Code in accordance with ANSI/APA PRG 320 and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) began to research and develop codes regarding the fire safety of CLT and other engineered woods. The 2021 revision of the IBC included three new construction types for mass timber buildings, Type IV-A, Type IV-B and Type IV-C. These new types enabled buildings using mass timber to be built taller and over greater areas than before. \n\nThe manufacturing of CLT is generally divided into nine steps: primary lumber selection, lumber grouping, lumber planing, lumber cutting, adhesive application, panel lay-up, assembly pressing, quality control and marking and shipping. : 77–91\n\nDuring primary lumber selection, lumber will undergo a moisture content (MC) check and visual grading. Depending on the application, structural testing (E-rating) may also be completed. The moisture content check is conducted because the lumber that is typically used, can arrive with a MC of 19% or less, but lumber for CLT needs to have a MC of approximately 12% during manufacturing to avoid internal stress due to shrinkage. This test is also done so that adjacent pieces of lumber do not have an MC difference greater than 5%. In order to conduct an MC check, various hand-held or on the line devices can be used. Some are more accurate than others, as they check moisture content within the wood not just at surface level. Further research and development is ongoing to improve the accuracy of such devices. Temperature in the manufacturing facility is also checked and maintained throughout this process to ensure the quality of the lumber. Visual grading is performed so that any warping in the lumber is prevented from affecting the pressure the bond line can withstand. It also ensures that waning, defects in the wood due to bark or missing wood due to the curvature of the log, does not significantly reduce the available bonding surface. For a product to be considered an E-class CLT, visual grading must be considered for perpendicular layers while parallel layers must be determined by the E-rating (the average stiffness of a piece of lumber). Products are classified as V-class if visual grading is used for both perpendicular and parallel layers. \n\nUsing the results from lumber selection, the grouping step ensures the timber of various categories are grouped together. Lumber used for the major and minor strength directions are grouped primarily relying on MC and visual grading. Within the major strength direction, all lumber is required to have the same engineering properties so that panel limitations can be determined. Likewise, all lumber for the minor direction must have a single set of properties. Higher quality lumber can also be grouped so that it is reserved for areas in which fasteners are installed to maximize fastener effectiveness. For aesthetic purposes, some lumber will be set aside so that the outermost layer of a panel is visually appealing. Timber that does not fit into either category may be used for different products, such as plywood or glued laminated timber.\n\nThe planing step improves the surfaces of the timber to reduce oxidation which increases the effectiveness of the adhesives. Approximately 2.5 mm is trimmed off the top and bottom faces and 3.8 mm is trimmed off the sides to ensure a flat surface. In some cases, when the lumber edges are not glued because they have an acceptable width tolerance, only the top and bottom faces are planed. It is possible that planing may increase the overall moisture content of the timber due to the drying variations throughout the wood. When this occurs, bonding suitability should be assessed and reconditioning may be necessary. \n\nThe timber is then cut to a certain length depending on the application and specific client needs. Cut-offs from the longitudinal layers may be used to create the transverse layers if the same specifications are needed for both the parallel and perpendicular layers.\n\nApplication of the adhesive occurs shortly after planing to avoid any issues affecting the surface of the lumber. Applying the adhesive is most often done in one of two ways: a through-feed process or side-by-side nozzles. In the through-feed process extruder heads distribute parallel threads of adhesive along the piece of lumber in an airtight system to avoid air gaps in the glue that could affect bonding strength. This is typically used for phenol resorcinol formaldehyde (PRF) or polyurethane-reactive (PUR) adhesives. For PUR adhesives, the layers of lumber may be misted to help with curing. The side-by-side nozzle option is commonly reserved for CLT layers that are formed in advance and works by installing the nozzles along a beam that will travel along the length of the lumber and apply the adhesive. To avoid additional manufacturing costs, adhesive is typically only applied to the top and bottom faces of the lumber, but edge-gluing can be done if necessary. \n\nPanel lay-up is performed next and involves laying the individual pieces of lumber together in preparation for assembly pressing. In accordance with ANSI/APA PRG 320, at least 80% of the surface area between layers must be bound together so that the bond is effective. In order to meet this standard, manufacturers are tasked with finding the most efficient way of laying the lumber. This time between spreading the adhesive and applying pressure is known as assembly time and must fall within the time targeted by the specific adhesive used.\n\nAssembly pressing completes the adhering process with either a vacuum press or a hydraulic press. Vacuum pressing generates a pressure of approximately 14.5 pounds per square inch (0.100 MPa), which is not always enough to address the warping potential or surface irregularities. To accommodate this, lumber shrinkage reliefs can be cut in the longitudinal direction. These reliefs release the stress in the lumber and decrease the risk of cracking due to drying. They must however, have a maximum width and depth so that the bonding area and panel strength are not impacted significantly. Using a vacuum press may be more beneficial in some circumstances, because they can press more than one CLT panel at once and can be used for curved elements. A hydraulic press on the other hand, generates a greater pressure, ranging from 40 to 80 pounds per square inch (280–550 kPa), and applies it to specific faces of the panel. For this reason, panels may need to undergo both vertical and side clamping pressing. \n\nOnce assembly pressing is complete, the CLT panels undergo quality control machining. Sanders are used to sand each panel down to the desired thickness with a tolerance of 1 mm, or less if specified by a project. The CLT panels are then moved to a multi-axis numerically controlled machine that makes precision cuts for doors, windows, splices, and connections. Any minor repairs that are necessary at this stage are completed manually.\n\nTo meet the requirements of ANSI/APA PRG 320 and ensure that the correct product has been specified, delivered, and installed, CLT panels must be marked to identify a variety of information. This includes the grade, thickness, mill name, agency name or logo, ANSI/APA PRG 320 symbol, manufacturer designations, and a top stamp if it is a custom panel. These markings must be stamped at intervals of 8 feet (2.4 m) or less so that when longer pieces are delivered to site and cut, they still display the necessary information. Further markings may be added to demonstrate the main direction of loading and the zones designed to receive connections. During shipping and construction, the CLT panels must be protected from the weather to maintain their structural integrity. \n\nAs a building material, CLT has numerous advantages:\n\nThere are also some drawbacks associated with CLT:\n\nCLT is used in a number of various different structures around the world.\n\nIn September 2016 the world's first timber mega-tube structure was built at the Chelsea College of Arts in London, using hardwood CLT panels. The 115-foot-long (35 m) \"Smile\" was designed by architect Alison Brooks and engineered by Arup , in collaboration with the American Hardwood Export Council , for the London Design Festival . The structure is a curved tube in a shape of a smile touching the floor at its centre and has a maximum capacity of 60 people. \n\nStadthaus , a residential building in Hackney, London , built in 2009, was the first building constructed using only CLT framing, including for the stairs and elevator shaft. At 9 stories and 30 m tall, at the time of construction, it was the tallest CLT building in the world. \n\nIn 2012, Forte Living, an apartment complex in Melbourne , Australia, became the tallest plyscraper framed with CLT alone. The building has 10 stories and stands just over 32 m tall. The 759 CLT panels necessary for the project were manufactured in Austria using European spruce that was grown and harvested there. \n\nIn 2022, the Ascent MKE building in Milwaukee , Wisconsin, became the tallest high-rise to utilize CLT components. Reaching 25 stories and 86.6 m, the Ascent relies on concrete, steel, and mass timber components. The CLT was primarily used to create the slabs for each floor. \n\nThe Mistissini Bridge in Mistissini , Quebec, Canada, is a 160-meter-long bridge that crosses the Uupaachikus Pass. Designed by Stantec and completed in 2014, the Mistissini Bridge employs the use of locally sourced CLT panels and glue-laminated timber girders to serve as the main structural members of the bridge. The bridge won numerous awards including the National Award of Excellence in the Transportation category at the 48th annual Association of Consulting Engineering Companies (ACEC) and also the Engineering a Better Canada Award. \n\nThe Exploded View is a fully CLT bridge in the design phase as of December 2022 [update] . Originally proposed in 2020 by Paul Cocksedge, this bridge will cross the Liesbeek River in Cape Town , South Africa. Cocksedge plans to manufacture the CLT from Eucalyptus trees, an invasive species in the area. \n\nThe Glenwood is a CLT parking garage that is part of a larger redevelopment plan in Springfield, Oregon . Construction is underway as of December 2022 [update] , but once complete, it will stand at four stories and have 360 parking spots. In order to help protect the CLT from the rain while keeping it exposed, a façade made from overlapping glass panels will be installed. \n\nOpen Platform and JAJA Architects won a design competition in 2020 for their plans to create a Park n’ Play garage in Aarhus , Denmark. The garage not only employs the use of CLT for the structure but surrounds the garage with planters and other greenery to promote the use of the space as more than just a place to leave a car. There are six stories with 700 spots, some designed specifically to promote green transportation, including charging stations and carpool only spots. The facility was designed to help the country achieve its goal of reaching carbon neutrality by 2050. \n\nCLT has also been identified as a suitable candidate for use in modular construction . Silicon Valley–based modular construction startup Katerra opened a 23,000-square-metre (250,000 sq ft) modular construction CLT factory in Spokane , Washington, in 2019 and some politicians were calling for the use of pre-fabricated modular CLT construction to address the housing crisis in cities like Seattle . \n\nThe Dyson Institute Village was built in 2019 on the outskirts of Malmesbury , England, to provide on-campus student housing for the Dyson Institute of Engineering and Technology . The village was designed as a number of stacked studio apartment modules by London architects WilkinsonEyre , and modeled after Montreal's Habitat 67 . The pods are constructed from CLT, with each pod wrapped in aluminum. \n\nAs a novel and renewable construction material, the demand of applying cross-laminated timber (CLT) has increased significantly. However, the mechanical properties of CLT have not been fully explored. This section primarily discusses research on the compressive strength and seismic behavior of CLT. In the compressive strength section, the impact of the number of CLT layers and the geometry of openings on a CLT panel is analyzed. Meanwhile, the seismic behavior of CLT is evaluated through a shaking table test that assesses the seismic shear capacity of the material.\n\nThe mechanical properties summary is based on the research of Pina et al. and Sato et al. \n\nCross-laminated timber (CLT) is an engineered wood product that is gaining popularity in the construction industry due to its numerous advantages, such as sustainability, cost-effectiveness, and ease of construction. Mechanical properties, particularly compressive strength, are key factors to consider when designing and constructing CLT panels. The number of layers in a CLT panel has a direct impact on its compressive strength, with more layers generally resulting in higher strength. However, in the case of keeping the certain thickness of a CLT panel, more layers will result in a lower buckling capacity. Additionally, the geometry of openings in a CLT panel can also affect its compressive strength, with larger openings leading to lower strength. Also, rectangular openings oriented perpendicular to the loading direction exhibit lower sensitivity to capacity reduction when subjected to critical loading changes compared to those with an orientation parallel to the loading direction. To achieve optimal mechanical properties, it is important to carefully consider both the number of layers and the geometry of openings when designing and constructing CLT panels.\n\nThe seismic behavior of cross-laminated timber (CLT) is an area of active research and development. Studies have shown that CLT has good seismic performance due to its high stiffness and strength, as well as its ductility and energy dissipation capacity. \n\nCross-laminated timber (CLT) is considered sustainable because it's made from renewable wood that can be harvested responsibly. CLT production is also eco-friendly, generating fewer greenhouse gas emissions and using less energy than traditional materials like concrete and steel. CLT can help reduce a building's carbon footprint , as it absorbs and stores carbon dioxide. Its lightweight, prefabricated design minimizes waste and improves construction efficiency. Finally, CLT is durable and long-lasting, with a projected lifespan of over 100 years, making it a promising option for sustainable construction.\n\nWhile linear elastic behavior is often assumed for Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT), in reality, its performance is not always linear and needs to be studied in a non-linear context. Additionally, the connection between different layers cannot always be fully bonded, and the moisture content of the wood will change over time. Furthermore, the impact of different opening shapes on CLT strength requires further investigation, and boundary conditions are not always simply supported. It is important to consider these factors when studying the behavior and performance of CLT in real-world applications.",
  "Raleigh Studios is a studio facility located in Hollywood, Los Angeles and has been under the ownership of Raleigh Enterprises since 1979. The location has been active since 1915. Before Raleigh, the studio was run by the Famous Players Film Company , Producers Studios, Clune Studios, California Studios, and others. Raleigh \"has no identifiable brand or logo\", serving as a rental space for numerous films both before Raleigh Enterprises ownership and afterward. Author Tom Ogden describes Raleigh Studios as \"an independent studio, unaffiliated with any of the majors\" which in 2009 had nine soundstages available. As of 2022, the location had 13 soundstages. \n\nThere are offshoots of Raleigh Studios, including Raleigh Studios Michigan in Pontiac, Michigan . ",
  "Keolis Nederland is a public transport company operating bus and passenger train services in the Netherlands. Originally created as Syntus and owned by Connexxion , Keolis and Nederlandse Spoorwegen , since 2012 Keolis Nederland has been a 100% subsidiary of Keolis. Syntus is an acronym for Syn ergy between T rain and B us . \n\nIn 1991 Geldersche Streekvervoer Maatschappij (GSM) and the Dutch Railways started a transport integration project called Integratie Gelderland Oost. Integration between train and bus was the main goal. GSM later merged with Gemeentelijk Vervoerbedrijf Arnhem to form Gelderse Vervoersmaatschappij.\n\nIn 1999 Syntus commenced rail operations, Connexxion , Keolis and Nederlandse Spoorwegen each owning one-third. In 2007 Connexxion's share was purchased by Keolis and Nederlandse Spoorwegen. In 2012 Keolis purchased Nederlandse Spoorwegen's 50% share. \n\nIn October 2017, Syntus was rebranded Keolis Nederland with a new visual identity. \n\nSyntus propagates synergy, which is based on a so-called 'visgraatmodel' (fish bone model). In this model train service represent the backbones. Bus services represent the spokes that feed train services. After a while other public transport companies like Arriva and Veolia Transport copied the model.\n\nIn 2005, Syntus briefly operated a cross border service into Germany from Arnhem to Emmerich . \n\nFrom December 2006 until December 2013, Syntus operated the Almelo to Mariënberg rail concession under sub-contract to Connexxion . \n\nIn August 2010, Syntus commenced an eight-year contract to operate services in Overijssel . In December 2010, it commenced a 10-year contract to operate services in Gelderland . In December 2016, it commenced a seven-year contract to operate services in Utrecht . \n\nIn December 2017, Keolis Nederland has commenced a ten-year contract to operate bus services in Almere . In the same month, it has commenced a 15-year contract to operate rail services in the province of Overijssel from Zwolle to Enschede and Zwolle to Kampen . These will be operated by 16 Stadler Flirts . \n\nSyntus' corporate identity consisted of the colors yellow, white and blue. Every region has its own identity incorporated in the corporate identity. The Syntus brand was retired in 2017 and replaced by the Keolis brand. \n\nMedia related to Keolis Nederland at Wikimedia Commons",
  "Wearing underwear as outerwear is a fashion trend popularized by celebrities, sports and media. It began as a practical and comfortable variation of clothing, such as the T-shirt and the sleeveless shirt , but later evolved into provocative, controversial fashion statements. 21st century versions include the display of thongs and bras in women's clothing, and the display of underpants under low-slung pants in men. Wearing underwear as outerwear has historical antecedents in the display of undergarments in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. \n\nIt is unclear when underwear as outerwear began as a fashion trend. In the 1920s Chanel unveiled womenswear made from jersey , a fabric that was usually used for undergarments . The T-shirt became popular outerwear after the Second World War . Short-sleeve shirts were originally intended to be a comfortable alternative to Victorian undergarments but teenagers began to wear them as outerwear, due in part to James Dean and Marlon Brando 's characters frequently wearing them this way in the movies Rebel Without a Cause and the A Streetcar Named Desire respectively. Swimwear , such as the bikini , was used as underwear before the Renaissance , and slip dresses were first widely worn in the 1990s , made from layered chiffon , polyester satins and charmeuse , and often trimmed with lace. \n\nIn entertainment, underwear-like outfits are often worn by wrestlers and circus performers ; former DC Comics editor Julius Schwartz said that this was the reason why superheroes like Superman wore briefs on top of their tights. Madonna has been credited for making lingerie a popular outfit for female music artists on stage (e.g. Beyonce , Lady Gaga , Britney Spears , Katy Perry ) when Jean-Paul Gaultier designed corsets (\"an emblematic symbol of fashion in the early 90s\"), a cone bra and girdle for her Blonde Ambition Tour costumes. Coloured and decorative nipple pasties have been worn by Cara Delevingne , Bella Hadid and Doja Cat as part of fashion outfits. For men, sagging is often said to have been started by rap and hip hop artists in the 1990s, as well as skateboarders. \n\nThe sexual liberation movement of 1968 began the re-appropriation of the corset as a symbol of rebellion and \"sexual perversity\" by young women associated with London’s punk and Goth subcultures. This re-appropriation allowed a symbol historically associated with female oppression, to become reconceived as a symbol of sexual empowerment in fashion. Outside of underwear fetishism , the corset made an appearance in evening gowns and wedding dresses. \n\nThe T-shirt would eventually become a part of sportswear fashion with designs from many fashion brands. Sports bras were first invented in 1975, and women have been wearing them under other clothing since then, but in 1999, Brandi Chastain scored the fifth kick in the penalty shootout to give the United States the win over China in the final game of the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup Final , and she spontaneously whipped off her jersey in celebration, exposing her sports bra. Her act is regarded by some as a historical event that boosted the wearing of sports bras on their own. From that point forward, sports bras have increasingly been worn as outerwear. \n\nSociety often portrays the public in underwear as surrealist and comedic: No Pants Day is an annual event held in various Western countries, where people publicly wear only underwear and leave their legs exposed. No Pants Subway Ride is a similar event to promote public wearing of underwear on subway trains. Another such event is Undie Run , where people run on the street wearing only their underwear.\n\nThe popularity of low-rise pants in the 21st century led to the unintentional trend of the \" whale tail \" among young women who aspired to wear something \"rump-flattering\", whereas sagging among young men and teenage boys became extremely controversial to the point of American towns demanding that it should be banned for indecency. However, the whale tail trend ended by the end of the 2000s and led to a rise in high-waisted clothing. \n\nMenswear never experienced a similar fashion turnaround, and men who wore high-waisted were ridiculed for wearing \" Dad jeans \". Underwear companies took note on men's preference of wearing their trousers at the hips because low-rise pants sat lower than underwear and caused non-sagging men to expose their underpants waistband , so they exploited it through designing waistbands with bright colors and larger logos. Calvin Klein Underwear chief creative designer Bob Mazzoli explained in 2009, \"Instead of a functional component, the waistband is a marketing platform and a canvas for real design [...] Seeing somebody with jeans that fall just below the waist to the point where the underwear shows is part of our cultural vernacular [and] it's something we consider in the design process.\" 2(x)ist 's creative director Jason Scarlatti added: \"It’s bragging rights for the customer. It says, ‘I paid good money for this.’\" Jockey underwear, credited as one of the first underwear brands to print its logo on waistbands, unveiled an advertising campaign in 2013 that featured models holding up their shirts to show the Jockey waistband exposed above their jeans and shorts. ",
  "Alexander Petrovich Dovzhenko , also Oleksandr Petrovych Dovzhenko ( Russian : Александр Петрович Довженко , Ukrainian : Олександр Петрович Довженко ; September 10 [ O.S. August 29] 1894 – November 25, 1956), was a Soviet film director and screenwriter of Ukrainian origin. He is often cited as one of the most important early Soviet filmmakers, alongside Sergei Eisenstein , Dziga Vertov , and Vsevolod Pudovkin , as well as being a pioneer of Soviet montage theory .\n\nOleksandr Dovzhenko was born in the hamlet of Viunyshche located in the Sosnitsky Uyezd of the Chernihiv Governorate of the Russian Empire (now part of Sosnytsia in Chernihiv Oblast , Ukraine ), to Petro Semenovych Dovzhenko and Odarka Yermolayivna Dovzhenko. His paternal ancestors were Chumaks who settled in Sosnytsia in the eighteenth century, coming from the neighbouring province of Poltava . Oleksandr was the seventh of fourteen children born to the couple, but due to the deaths of his siblings he was the oldest child by the time he turned eleven. Ultimately, only Oleksandr and his sister Polina, who later becomes a doctor, survived to adulthood.\n\nAlthough his parents were uneducated, Dovzhenko's semi-literate grandfather encouraged him to study, leading him to become a teacher at the age of 19. He avoided military service during World War I because of a heart condition, but during the Civil War he may have served for some time in the army of the Ukrainian People's Republic . In 1919 in Zhytomyr he was taken prisoner and sent to the prison on suspicion of intelligence for the UPR army. At the end of 1919, he was released at the request of Vasyl Ellan-Blakytny . After his release, for some time he taught history and geography at the officers' school of the Red Army. In 1920 Dovzhenko joined the Borotbist party. He served as an assistant to the Ambassador in Warsaw as well as Berlin . Upon his return to USSR in 1923, he began illustrating books and drawing cartoons in Kharkiv . At that time, Dovzhenko was also a member of VAPLITE .\n\nDovzhenko turned to film in 1926 when he landed in Odessa . His ambitious drive led to the production of his second-ever screenplay , Vasya the Reformer (which he also co-directed). He gained greater success with Zvenigora in 1928, the story of a young adventurer who becomes a bandit and counter-revolutionary and comes to a bad end, while his virtuous brother spends the film fighting for the revolution, which established him as a major filmmaker of his era. \n\nHis following \"Ukraine Trilogy\" ( Zvenigora , Arsenal , and Earth ), are his most well-known works in the West. Arsenal was badly received by the communist authorities in Ukraine, who began harassing Dovzhenko - but, fortunately for him, Stalin watched it and liked it. \n\nDovzhenko's Earth has been praised as one of the greatest silent movies ever made. The British film director Karel Reisz was asked in 2002 by the British Film Institute to rank the greatest films ever made, and he put Earth second. The film portrayed collectivization in a positive light. Its plot revolved around a landowner's attempt to ruin a successful collective farm as it took delivery of its first tractor, though it opened with a long close-up of an elderly, dying man taking intense pleasure in the taste of an apple - a scene with no obvious political message, but with some aspect of autobiography. The film was panned by the Soviet authorities. The poet, Demyan Bedny , attacked its \"defeatism\" over three columns of the newspaper Izvestia , and Dovzhenko was forced to re-edit it. \n\nDovzhenko's next film, Ivan , portrayed a Dneprostroi construction worker and his reactions to industrialization, which was then summarily denounced for promoting fascism and pantheism . Fearing arrest, Dovzhenko personally appealed to Stalin. One day later, he was invited to the Kremlin, where he read the script of his next project, Aerograd , about the defence of a newly constructed city from Japanese infiltrators, to an audience of four of the most powerful men in the country - Stalin , Molotov , Kirov and Voroshilov . Stalin approved the project but 'suggested' that Dovzhenko's next project, after Aerograd , should be dramatized biography of the born in Ukraine communist guerrilla fighter, Mykola Shchors .\n\nIn January 1935, the Soviet film industry celebrated its fifteenth anniversary with a major festival, during which the country's most renowned director Sergei Mikhailovich Eisenstein , who was in trouble with the authorities, and had not been allowed to complete a film for several years, gave a rambling speech that jumped from one esoteric topic to another. Dovzhenko joined in the criticism, raising a laugh pleading: \"Sergei Mikhailovich, if you do not produce a film at least within a year, then please do not produce one at all... All this talk about Polynesian females, I will gladly exchange all your unfinished scenarios for one of your films.\" At the end of the conference, Stalin presented Dovzhenko with the Order of Lenin. \n\nLater, Dovzhenko was summoned to the Kremlin again, and told by Stalin that he was a \"free man\", who was not under \"any obligation\" to make the film about Shchors. He took the hint, and paused work on Aerograd to follow Stalin's 'suggestion', and sent the dictator a draft of the screenplay for Schors. He was then summoned in front of the boss of the Soviet film industry Boris Shumyatsky to be told that the script contained serious political errors. His request for another meeting with Stalin was ignored, so he wrote to the dictator on 26 November 1936, pleading: \"This is my life, and if I am doing it wrong, then it is due to a shortage of talent or development, not malice. I bear your refusal to see me as a great sorrow.\" Stalin's response was a brief note to Shumyatsky, in December, listing five things that were wrong with the script, including that \"Shchors came out too crude and uncouth.\" \n\nDovzhenko completed Aerograd in 1935. Before its release in November, Dovzhenko had begun work on Shchors . According to Jay Leyda, who was employed in the Soviet cinema industry at the time:\n\nShchors taught him the new difficulties of executing a suggestion from Stalin. In the three years before its release, Dovchenko had to submit every decision and every episode to a seemingly endless series of people 'who knew what Stalin wanted'. There were nightmare interview, some bitter, with the Leader himself, who was beginning to show signs of megalomania and infallibility...Dovzhenko later told friends about one frightening arrival in Stalin's office, when he refused to speak to Dovchenko, and Beria accused him of joining a nationalist conspiracy. \n\nSeveral of Dovzhenko's colleagues were shot or sent to labour camps during the Great Purge , in 1937–38, including his favourite cameraman, Danylo Demutsky, who worked with him on Earth . But when, at last, he had completed Shchors , which was released in January 1939, he was paid a huge fee - 100,000 rubles - and awarded the Stalin Prize (1941).\n\nDuring the war, Dovzhenko wrote an article and a screenplay Ukraine in Flames , which was denounced for its alleged 'veiled nationalistic moods'. There are two versions of who was behind the denunciation. Nikita Khrushchev , who was head of the Ukrainian communist party at the time, paid tribute to Dovzhenko in his memoirs as a \"brilliant director\", and described the denunciation of Ukraine in Flames as a \"disgraceful affair\" initiated by the head of the political administration of the Red Army, Aleksandr Shcherbakov , who \"was obviously trying hard to fan Stalin's anger by harping on the charge that the film scenario was extremely nationalistic.\" Dovzhenko had read the scenario aloud to Khrushchev, but he claimed not to have paid much attention to it because he was focused on the war.\n\nBut a police report sent at the time by the head of the NKVD Vsevolod Merkulov to the party secretary in charge of culture, Andrei Zhdanov , said that Dovzhenko greatly resented the behaviour of Khrushchev, and leaders of the Ukrainian writers' union, who had praised the scenario on first reading, but then denounced on orders from above. Dovzhenko was quoted as saying \"I don't hold anything against Stalin. I hold something against .. people who throw malicious slogans at me after all their admiration of the screenplay - these people cannot guide the war and the people. This is trash.\" \n\nAfter being hauled in front of the Central Committee, Dovzhenko was excluded from various official organisations, cut himself off from fellow artists, wrote novels, and applied himself to writing a screenplay about the biologist, Michurin . The film Michurin earned him another Stalin prize, in 1949, although it was revised so many times, in order to get political approval, that according to one historian, \"a large part of the final version was made without him.\" \n\nKhrushchev claimed that with his rise to power after the death of Stalin and the execution of the police chief Lavrentiy Beria , the persecution of Dovzhenko ended, and he was able to \"live a useful active life\" again. He embarked on two projects, a film adaption of the novella, Taras Bulba , by Gogol and Poem About a Sea , neither of which was completed before Dovzhenko died of a heart attack on November 25, 1956, in his dacha in Peredelkino - though the latter was completed by his widow Yulia Solntseva . Over a 20-year career, Dovzhenko personally directed only seven films.\n\nDovchenko was a mentor to the young Soviet Ukrainian filmmakers Larisa Shepitko and Sergei Parajanov .\n\nThe Dovzhenko Film Studios in Kyiv were named after him in his honour following his death.\n\nIn 2016, after the Ukraine government had announced a programme of 'decommunisation' of place names, Karl Liebknecht Street in Melitopol , in East Ukraine, was renamed Oleksandr Dovzhenko Street. On 30 January 2023, after Melitopol had been occupied by the Russian army during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine , Melitopol's Russian-installed Mayor, Galina Danilchenko announced that the street would be given back its previous name. \n\n* codirected by Yuliya Solntseva\n\nA film award called the Oleksandr Dovzhenko State Prize was named after him for his great contributions in the film sphere. ",
  "French emigration from the years 1789 to 1815 refers to the mass movement of citizens from France to neighboring countries, in reaction to the instability and upheaval caused by the French Revolution and the succeeding Napoleonic rule. Although initiated in 1789 as a peaceful effort led by the Bourgeoisie to increase political equality for the Third Estate (the unprivileged majority of the French people), the Revolution soon turned into a violent, popular movement. To escape political tensions and, mainly during the Reign of Terror , to save their lives, a number of individuals emigrated from France and settled in the neighboring countries (chiefly Great Britain , Austria , and Prussia or other German states), though a few also went to the Americas.\n\nWhen the Estates General convened in May 1789 and aired out their political grievances, many members of each estate found themselves in agreement with the idea that the bulk of France, the Third Estate, was carrying the tax burden without equitable political representation. They even took an oath, the Tennis Court Oath , swearing to pursue their political goals and committing to drafting a constitution which codified equality. Soon, the ideologies of fair and equal treatment by the government and liberation from the old regime diffused throughout France.\n\nWhile Abbé Sièyes and several other men of the first and second estates supported the Third Estate's desire for equality, several members of the clergy and nobility were averse to it. Under the old regime, they were accustomed with a certain quality of living and with the right to pass this life to their children. The Revolution was looking to remove all privilege in an effort to make everyone politically equal, so the first émigrés , or emigrants, were proponents of the old order and chose to leave France although emigration abroad was not prohibited. \n\nThe summer of 1789 saw the first voluntary émigrés. Many of these émigrés were members of the nobility who migrated out of fear sparked by the Storming of the Bastille in July 1789. Notable émigrés include Madames Adélaïde and Victoire , aunts of King Louis XVI , who on 19 February 1791 started their journey to Rome to live nearer to the Pope. However, their journey was stopped by and largely debated by the National Assembly who feared that their emigration implied that King Louis and his family would soon follow suit. While this fear eventually resulted in the Day of Daggers and later the King's attempt to escape Paris , the Madames were permitted to continue their journey after statesman Jacques-François de Menou joking about the Assembly's preoccupation with the actions of \"two old women\". \n\nUpon settling in neighboring countries such as Great Britain, they were able to assimilate well and maintained a certain level of comfort in their new lifestyles. This was a significant emigration; it marked the presence of many royalists outside France where they could be safe, alive, and await their opportunity to reenter the French political climate. But events in France made the prospect of return to their former way of life uncertain. In November 1791, France passed a law demanding that all noble émigrés return by January 1, 1792. If they chose to disobey, their lands woul be confiscated and sold, and any later attempt to reenter the country would result in execution. \n\nHowever, the majority of the émigrés left France not in 1789 at the crux of the revolution, but in 1792 after the warfare had broken out. Unlike the privileged classes who had voluntarily fled earlier, those displaced by war were driven out by fear for their lives and were of lower status and lesser or no means. \n\nAs the notions of political freedom and equality spread, people began developing different opinions on who should reap the benefits of active citizenship. The political unity of the revolutionaries had begun to fizzle out by 1791, although they had succeeded in establishing a Constitutional monarchy .\n\nSimultaneously, the Revolution was plagued with many problems. In addition to political divisions, they were dealing with the hyperinflation of the National Convention 's fiat paper currency, the assignats , revolts against authority in the countryside, slave uprisings in colonial territories such as the Haitian Revolution , and no peaceful end in sight. Someone had to be blamed for the failures of the revolution, and it certainly could not be the fault of the revolutionaries for they were on the side of liberty and justice. As Thomas E. Kaiser argues in his article \"From the Austrian Committee to the Foreign Plot: Marie-Antoinette, Austrophobia, and the Terror\", centuries of Austrophobia was reincarnated into a firm belief in an Austrian-led conspiracy aiming to thwart the revolution. Kaiser states that the Foreign Plot:\n\nconsisted of a massive, multilayered conspiracy by counterrevolutionary agents abetted by the allies, who allegedly—and quite possibly in reality—sought to undermine the Republic through a coordinated effort to corrupt government officials associated with the more moderate wing of the Jacobin establishment and to defame the government by mobilizing elements on the extreme left.\" \n\nA political faction known as the Jacobins , who had a very active radical faction, the Girondists , genuinely feared this conspiratorial plot. Rousseau , a philosophe influential in the Enlightenment, spread the idea of a \"collective will\", a singular purpose which the people of a nation must all unequivocally support. If anyone was against the collective will, they were a part of this counterrevolutionary conspiracy, and since the momentum of the Revolution had to be protected at all costs, any and all threats had to be eliminated. This attitude toward dissension only grew more violent and bloodthirsty throughout 1793-1794 when Robespierre enacted the Reign of Terror . In order to preserve the \"republic of virtue\", Robespierre had to \" cleanse\" the country of anyone who spoke out or acted against the virtues of the revolution by way of the guillotine .\n\nDuring the Terror, no one was safe from scrutiny or potential execution, ultimately not even Robespierre himself. This omnipresent sense of fear inspired many of lesser means to flee France, often without much preparation and therefore no money or helpful belongings. Those who left France were a heterogeneous bunch socioeconomically and professionally, although the vast majority of migrants were men. While these people came from diverse financial backgrounds, they all more or less suffered the same poverty while traveling. In his thesis \"'La Généreuse Nation!' Britain and the French Emigration 1792-1802\", Callum Whittaker recounts that while leaving France one aristocrat \"disguised herself as a sailor, and hid for a day in the hold of a ship underneath a pile of ropes\". Also, captains and sailors saw this as an opportunity to earn a little on the side, and so they levied taxes on the emigrants, leaving them on the shores of another nation with nothing. Yet still, thousands chose this path of discomfort and destitution because it at least provided the promise of peace. \n\nThis exodus largely took place during 1791-1794. Groups of émigrés that fled during this period included non-juring priests (i.e. priests that refused to take the oath of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy ). They fled following the confiscation of their estates as well as legislation in August 1792 that stipulated that these refractory priests leave France willingly or be deported to French Guiana .\n\nThe demise of Robespierre in 1794 provided a brief respite for Royalists at home and abroad. For example, those who had participated in the Vendée uprising were able to communicate with their supporters in Great Britain. These rebels, in collaboration with their British allies, attempted to take a port on the French coast. However, this attempt was unsuccessful, resulting in the execution of 748 royalist officers, an event that became known as the Quiberon disaster. As the Republic evolved into the Directory , fears that émigrés with royalist leanings would return prompted harsher legislation against them, including the Law of Hostages passed in 1799. This legislation considered relatives of émigrés as hostages and ordered them to surrender within ten days or to be treated as émigrés themselves. \n\nThe Jewish people were viewed with suspicion during this time. While a percentage of the Jewish people was politically aligned with the Royalists , the distrust was unwarranted. A majority of Jews were not counterrevolutionaries and did not partake in crimes against the republic such as money crimes with the assignats , although this was highly speculated. In Alsace , minorities such as the Jews and Protestants were pro-revolution, while the Catholic majority was not. Despite these facts, as Zosa Szajkowski states in the text Jews and the French Revolutions of 1789, 1830, and 1848 it was still a widely held belief that \"the Jews wanted to bring about a counter-revolution with all its destruction and death\". Thus, the Jews were continuously unfairly suspected of fraud, although rarely ever convicted for it. Also, their correspondence in Hebrew with those living outside France was restricted. August Mauger, the leader of the terror in Nancy, refused to give Jews passports. Those emigrating had to do so illegally, without proper documentation and thus without guarantee of success. The threat of execution was very real for many more people than simply the Jewish population of France. Lacoste, the safety commissioner of Alsace, believed that one-fourth of the Parisian population should be guillotined. Jewish and non-Jewish alike emigrated to the Upper Rhine; despite periodic pogroms in the area, it was still better than the Lower Rhine where the Terror was rampant; very few Jewish Frenchmen remained in Alsace. The Jewish émigrés had to face the challenges of assimilating to a new culture which harbored a strong anti-Jewish and anti-French sentiment. Furthermore, the annual summertime invasions of the French army from 1793–1799 meant the immediate evacuation of any immigrant population. Consequently, the exact number of French in any specific area varied at any given time, but historical estimates place the number in the several thousand. \n\nThe Armée des Émigrés ( Army of the Emigrants ) were counter-revolutionary armies raised outside France by and out of royalist Émigrés, with the aim of overthrowing the French Revolution, reconquering France and restoring the monarchy . These were aided by royalist armies within France itself, such as the Catholic and Royal Army and the Chouans , and by allied countries such as Great Britain , Prussia, Austria and the Dutch Republic. They fought, for example, at the sieges of Lyon and Toulon .\n\nFor most émigrés, returning to France was out of the question. While they did manage to escape the guillotine, they would face the death penalty if they were to return. Furthermore, their property and possessions were confiscated by the state, so there would be nowhere and nothing to return to. Wherever the migrants ended up, it was imperative that they were able to assimilate to the local culture.\n\nUpon arrival in their host nations, the émigrés were watched with a cautious eye. Many locals were naturally wary of these foreigners who did not share their customs and who had been exposed to radical, violent, revolutionary principles. Although there was initial hesitation, citizens quickly learned that these migrants were refugees, searching for tranquility and focusing on how to feed themselves and their family members, not agents sent by France to disrupt the political order. While this generation of individuals did not have the luxury of being very politically active, their presence in neighboring European countries and the United States caused a wrinkle in the fabric of society. These thousands of men, women, and children had survived a popular uprising and would never be able to forget their experiences in revolutionary France, the uncertainty, turmoil, and promise of liberty. \n\nAs a result of the French Revolution, French migration to the Canadas was decelerated significantly during, and after the French Revolution; with only a small number of nobles, artisans and professionals, and religious emigres from France permitted to settle in the Canadas during that period. Most of these migrants moved into cities in Lower Canada , including Montreal or Quebec City , although French nobleman Joseph-Geneviève de Puisaye also led a small group of French royalists to settle lands north of York (present day Toronto ). The influx of religious migrants from France contributed towards the revitalization of the Roman Catholic Church in the Canadas, with the French refectory priests who moved to the Canadas being responsible for the establishment of a number of parishes throughout British North America . \n\nTens of thousands of émigrés saw America as a compelling destination for multiple reasons. Those who craved peace and stability were drawn to the neutral stance America had taken on the many wars France was engaged in with her neighbors. The majority of emigrants were older and left France as individuals and sought out where to live in the United States based on what professional opportunities were available there. Leaving their homelands with nothing, these Frenchmen were set on finding a way to feed themselves and make a living. Although they appreciated being away from the Terror, the French felt distant from their American denizens and imposed a self-isolation from their community. \n\nAlong with the social changes that plagued the French nobility in their new transition to America, the émigrés now had to concern themselves with the issue of finances, as a result of the seizing of their assets during the Revolution. : 93 They now had to find a way to sustain themselves in a society that did not value them as they had been valued before.\n\nMany noblemen found themselves conflicted with the idea of entering the business realm of the American society, as Enlightenment ideals discouraged business as a moral or noble activity. Nonetheless, the émigrés took up pursuits in real estate, finance, and smaller family owned businesses. These were all to be temporary endeavors, however, as the French nobility still aimed to leave the Americas at the most opportune moment. : ch. 5\n\nMany of the French émigrés returned to France during the Thermidorian regime , which saw more lenient regulations and allowed their names to be erased from the registry of émigrés. Those in America had prepared themselves for the return to French culture by researching the social and political climate, as well as their prospects for earning back their wealth upon arrival. Although some émigrés were willing to leave as soon as they were legally able to, many awaited the changing of the political climate to align to their own ideals before venturing back to France. Many felt the need to be cautious following the radical ideas and events that had characterized the Revolution thus far. : 105–7\n\nI am a bold true British tar call'd Jolly Jack of Dover,\n\nI've lately been employ'd much in bringing Frenchmen over.\n\nSplit my top-sails if e'er I had such cargoes before, Sir,\n\nAnd sink me to the bottom if I carry any more, Sir.\n\nChorus : O! no the devil a bit with Jolly Jack of Dover,\n\nNone of you murd'ring Frenchmen to England shall come over. ...\n\nMany more stayed in Europe, especially in Great Britain, France's neighbour to the north. The country appealed to people because it had a channel separating them from the revolutionaries and because it was known for being tolerant. Additionally, England, more than America, allowed for the maintenance of the French way of life for the elites because \"the etiquette of European elites was as universal in the eighteenth century as it would ever become\". \n\nEmigrants primarily settled in London and Soho , the latter had grown into a thriving French cultural district, complete with French hotels and cuisine, although it had long been a haven for French exiles, housing many thousands of Frenchmen from the last mass migration which occurred in reaction to the revocation of the Edict of Nantes . Here the French had a somewhat easier transition into English society, but to say emigrating to this district was easy is to dismiss how truly austere their circumstance; \"money remained a chronic concern and hunger a constant companion\" (Whittaker). Most people just picked back up the trades they had in France, and aristocrats found themselves having to seek employment for the first time in years. Those who were educated often offered their services as instructors in French, dancing, and fencing. Those who had no knowledge of skills that would benefit them as laborers turned to crime. The truly elite émigrés settled in Marylebone , Richmond , and Hampstead . The politics of these areas were extremely royalist. In contrast, émigrés from the lower classes of society often settled in St. Pancras and St. George's Fields. Both of these areas facilitated the ability of the émigrés to maintain their Catholic faith. In St. Pancras , émigrés were allowed to use the Anglican church, and for occasions of particular significance, they were allowed to worship without any interference from the Anglican clergy. In St. George's Fields , the Chapel of Notre-Dame was opened in 1796. These poorer émigrés were an eclectic group. They included widows, men wounded in war, the elderly, the ecclesiastics, and some provincial nobility along with domestic servants. It has been noted that \"there was little that these émigrés had in common besides their misfortunes and their stoic perseverance in the absence of any alternative\" Malnutrition and poor living conditions led to an onslaught of maladies, and death did not quite put an end to their suffering for even posthumously their families were beset with the financial burden of administering their funeral rites. \n\nThe number of refugees fleeing into Britain reached its climax in autumn of 1792. In September alone, a total of nearly 4,000 refugees landed in Britain. The number of displaced persons who found themselves in Great Britain was high, although the exact number is debated, it is believed to be in the thousands. The uncontrolled influx of foreigners created significant anxiety in government circles and the wider community. After much debate, the Parliament of Great Britain passed the Aliens Act 1793 which served to regulate and reduce immigration. Those entering the country were required to give their names, ranks, occupations, and addresses to the local Justice of Peace. Those who did not comply, were deported or imprisoned. Community concern at the influx of French refugees slowly abated as time passed and the circumstances of the French Revolution became better known, and there is considerable evidence of charitable and hospitable acts toward the émigrés. The Wilmot Committee, a private network of social elite, provided fiscal support to the refugees, and later the government adopted a national relief campaign which gained support both from those with political clout as well as the masses. ",
  "A rabbi ( / ˈ r æ b aɪ / ⓘ ; Hebrew : רַבִּי , romanized : rabbī ) is a spiritual leader or religious teacher in Judaism . One becomes a rabbi by being ordained by another rabbi—known as semikha —following a course of study of Jewish history and texts such as the Talmud . The basic form of the rabbi developed in the Pharisaic (167 BCE–73 CE) and Talmudic (70–640 CE) eras, when learned teachers assembled to codify Judaism's written and oral laws. The title \"rabbi\" was first used in the first century CE. In more recent centuries, the duties of a rabbi became increasingly influenced by the duties of the Protestant Christian minister , hence the title \" pulpit rabbis.\" Further, in 19th-century Germany and the United States, rabbinic activities such as sermons , pastoral counseling, and representing the community to the outside all increased in importance.\n\nWithin the various Jewish denominations , there are different requirements for rabbinic ordination and differences in opinion regarding who is recognized as a rabbi. Non-Orthodox movements (i.e., the Conservative , Reform , Reconstructionist , and Renewal movements) have chosen to do so for what they view as halakhic reasons (Conservative Judaism) as well as ethical reasons (Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism). \n\nThe word comes from the Mishnaic Hebrew construct רְבִּי rǝbbī , [ a ] meaning 'Master [Name]'; the standard Hebrew noun is רב rav 'master'. Rav is also used as a title for rabbis, as are rabbeinu ('our master') and ha-rav ('the master'). A derived term is rebbe .\n\nThe Hebrew root in turn derives from the Semitic root ר-ב-ב ‎ (R-B-B), which in Biblical Aramaic means 'great' in many senses, including 'revered', but appears primarily as a prefix in construct forms. Although the usage rabim 'many' (as 1 Kings 18:25, הָרַבִּים ) 'the majority', 'the multitude' occurs for the assembly of the community in the Dead Sea Scrolls , there is no evidence to support an association of this use with the later title \"rabbi\". The root is cognate to Arabic ربّ rabb , meaning 'lord' (generally used when talking about God, but also about temporal lords), and to the Syriac word ܪܒܝ rabi .\n\nSome communities, especially Sephardic and Yemenite Jews , historically pronounced the title רִבִּי rībbī ; this pronunciation competed with רְבִּי rǝbbī and רַבִּי rabbī in Ashkenaz until the modern period. \n\nRabbi is not an occupation found in the Hebrew Bible , and ancient generations did not employ related titles such as Rabban , Rabbi , or Rav to describe either the Babylonian sages or the sages in Israel. For example, Hillel I and Shammai (the religious leaders of the early first century) had no rabbinic title prefixed to their names. The titles \"Rabban\" and \"Rabbi\" are first mentioned in Jewish literature in the Mishnah . Rabban was first used for Rabban Gamaliel the elder , Rabban Simeon his son , and Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai , all of whom were patriarchs or presidents of the Sanhedrin in the first century. Early recipients of the title rabbi include Rabbi Zadok and Rabbi Eliezer ben Jacob , beginning in the time of the disciples of Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai . The title \"Rabbi\" occurs (in Greek transliteration ῥαββί rabbi ) in the books of Matthew , Mark , and John in the New Testament , where it is used in reference to \"Scribes and Pharisees \" as well as to Jesus . According to some, the title \"rabbi\" or \"rabban\" was first used after 70 CE to refer to Yochanan ben Zakkai and his students, and references in rabbinic texts and the New Testament to rabbis earlier in the 1st century are anachronisms or retroactive honorifics. Other scholars believe that the term \"rabbi\" was a well-known informal title by the beginning of the first century CE, and thus that the Jewish and Christian references to rabbis reflect the titles in fact used in this period. \n\nThe governments of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were based on a system that included the Jewish kings , the Jewish prophets, the legal authority of the high court of Jerusalem, the Great Sanhedrin , and the ritual authority of the priesthood . Members of the Sanhedrin had to receive their ordination ( semicha ) in an uninterrupted line of transmission from Moses , yet rather than being referred to as rabbis they were called priests or scribes, like Ezra, who is called in the Bible \"Ezra, the priest, the scribe, a scribe of the words of God's commandments and of His statutes unto Israel.\" \"Rabbi\" as a title does not appear in the Hebrew Bible, though later rabbinic sources occasionally use it as a title for wise Biblical figures. \n\nWith the destruction of the two Temples in Jerusalem , the end of the Jewish monarchy, and the decline of the dual institutions of prophets and the priesthood, the focus of scholarly and spiritual leadership within the Jewish people shifted to the sages of the Men of the Great Assembly ( Anshe Knesset HaGedolah ). This assembly was composed of the earliest group of \"rabbis\" in the more modern sense of the word, in large part because they began the formulation and explication of what became known as Judaism's \" Oral Law \" ( Torah SheBe'al Peh ). This was eventually encoded and codified within the Mishnah and Talmud and subsequent rabbinical scholarship, leading to what is known as Rabbinic Judaism .\n\nThe traditional explanation is that from the 1st to 5th centuries, the title \"Rabbi\" was given to those sages of the Land of Israel who received formal ordination ( semicha ), while the lesser title \"Rav\" was given to sages who taught in the Babylonian academies , as ordination could not be performed outside the Land of Israel. Sherira Gaon summarized the relationship between these titles as follows: \"Rabbi is greater than Rav, Rabban is greater than Rabbi, one's name is greater than Rabban\". However, some modern scholars argue that \"Rabbi\" and \"Rav\" are the same title, pronounced differently due to variations in dialect. \n\nAfter the suppression of the Patriarchate and Sanhedrin by Theodosius II in 425, there was no more formal ordination in the strict sense. A recognised scholar could be called Rav or Hacham , like the Babylonian sages. The transmission of learning from master to disciple remained of tremendous importance, but there was no formal rabbinic qualification as such.\n\nIn the early Middle Ages \"rabbi\" was not a formal title, but was used as a term of respect for Jews of great scholarship and reputation. After the emergence of Karaism , Jews who still followed the Talmudic traditions became known as \"rabbanites\". Initially communities might have a religious judge appointed by the central geonate , often possessing a certification known as pitka dedayanuta or bearing the title chaver (short for chaver besanhedrin hagedolah , used in Israel) or aluf (used in Babylonia). By the 11th century, as the geonate weakened it was common for Jewish communities to elect a local spiritual authority. In the 11th–12th century, some local rabbinic authorities in Spain received formal certification known as ketav masmich or ketav minui in preparation for their leadership role. Maimonides ruled that every congregation is obliged to appoint a preacher and scholar to admonish the community and teach Torah, and the social institution he describes is the germ of the modern congregational rabbinate.\n\nUntil the Black Death , Ashkenazi communities typically made religious decisions by consensus of scholars on a council, rather than the decision of a single authority. In the 14th century, the concept arose of a single person who served as religious authority for particular area (the mara de'atra ). Formal ordination is first recorded among Ashkenazim with Meir ben Baruch Halevi (late 14th century), who issued the formal title Moreinu (our teacher) to scholars, though it likely existed somewhat earlier. By the 15th century, this formal ordination (known as semicha ) became necessary in order to be recognized as a rabbi. Initially some Sephardic communities objected to such formal ordination, but over time the system became adopted by them too. : 13\n\nA dramatic change in rabbinic functions occurred with Jewish emancipation . Tasks that were once the primary focus for rabbis, such as settling disputes by presiding over a Jewish court, became less prominent, while other tasks that were secondary, like delivering sermons, increased in importance.\n\nIn 19th-century Germany and the United States, the duties of the rabbi in some respects became increasingly similar to the duties of other clergy, like the Protestant Christian minister , and the title \" pulpit rabbis\" appeared to describe this phenomenon. Sermons , pastoral counseling, representing the community to the outside, all increased in importance. Non-Orthodox rabbis, on a day-to-day business basis, now spend more time on these functions than they do teaching or answering questions on Jewish law and philosophy. Within the Modern Orthodox community, many rabbis still mainly deal with teaching and questions of Jewish law, but many are increasingly dealing with these same pastoral functions. \n\nTraditionally, rabbis have never been an intermediary between God and humans. This idea was traditionally considered outside the bounds of Jewish theology . Unlike spiritual leaders in many other faiths, they are not considered to be imbued with special powers or abilities.\n\nRabbis serve the Jewish community. Hence their functions vary as the needs of the Jewish community vary over time and from place to place.\n\nIn antiquity those who performed rabbinic functions, such as judging a case or teaching Torah to students, did not receive compensation for their services. Being a rabbi was not a full-time profession and those who served had other occupations to support themselves and their families, such as woodchopper, sandal-maker, carpenter, water-carrier, farmer and tanner. A respected scholar, Rabbi Zadok (1st cent. CE), had said \"never to use the Torah as a spade for digging,\" and this was understood to mean never to use one's Torah knowledge for an inappropriate purpose, such as earning a fee. Still, as honored members of the community, Torah sages were allowed a series of privileges and exemptions that alleviated their financial burdens somewhat. These included such things as tax exemption from communal levies, marketplace priority (first in, first out regarding their trade), receiving personal services from their students ( shimush talmedei hakhamim ), silent business partnerships with wealthy merchants, and a substitute fee to replace their lost earnings when they had to leave work to perform a rabbinic function ( sekhar battalah ). \n\nDuring the period of the Geonim ( c. 650 –1050 CE), opinions on compensation shifted. It was deemed inappropriate for the leaders of the Jewish community to appear in the marketplace as laborers or vendors of merchandise, and leading a Jewish community was becoming a full-time occupation. Under these conditions, the Geonim collected taxes and donations at home and abroad to fund their schools ( yeshivot ) and paid salaries to teachers, officials and judges of the Jewish community, whom they appointed. Maimonides (1135–1204), who supported himself as a physician, reasserted the traditional view of offering rabbinic service to the Jewish community without compensation. It remains the ideal. But circumstances had changed. Jewish communities required full-time rabbis, and the rabbis themselves preferred to spend their days studying and teaching Torah rather than working at a secular trade.\n\nBy the fifteenth century it was the norm for Jewish communities to compensate their rabbis, although the rabbi's contract might well refer to a \"suspension fee\" ( sekhar battalah ) rather than a salary, as if he were relinquishing a salary from secular employment. The size of salaries varied, depending on the size of the community served, with rabbis in large cities being well-compensated while rabbis in small towns might receive a small stipend. Rabbis were able to supplement their rabbinic incomes by engaging in associated functions and accepting fees for them, like serving as the community's scribe, notary and archivist, teaching in the elementary school or yeshivah, publishing books, arbitrating civil litigations, or even serving as a matchmaker. \n\nWith the formation of rabbinical seminaries starting in the nineteenth century, the rabbinate experienced a degree of professionalization that is still underway. At the present time, an ordained graduate of a rabbinical seminary that is affiliated with one of the modern branches of Judaism, Reform, Conservative, Reconstructionist, or modern Orthodox, will find employment—whether as a congregational rabbi, teacher, chaplain, Hillel director, camp director, social worker or administrator—through the placement office of his or her seminary. Like any modern professional, he or she will negotiate the terms of employment with potential employers and sign a contract specifying duties, duration of service, salary, benefits, pension and the like. A rabbi's salary and benefits today tend to be similar to those of other modern professionals, such as lawyers and accountants, with similar levels of post-graduate education. It is also possible to engage in the rabbinate part-time, e.g. at a synagogue with a small membership; the rabbi's salary will be proportionate to the services rendered and he or she will likely have additional employment outside the synagogue. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe practical basis for rabbinic authority involves the acceptance of the rabbinic individual and their scholarly credentials. In practical terms, Jewish communities and individuals commonly proffer allegiance to the authority of the rabbi they have chosen. Such a rabbinic leader is sometimes called the \"Master of the Locale\" ( mara d'atra ). Jewish individuals may acknowledge the authority of others but will defer legal decisions to the mara d'atra . \n\nThe rabbi derives authority from achievements within a meritocratic system. Rabbis' authority is neither nominal nor spiritual—it is based on credentials. Typically the rabbi receives an institutional stamp of approval. It is this authority that allows them to engage in the halakhic process and make legal prescriptions. \n\nThe same pattern is true within broader communities, ranging from Hasidic communities to rabbinical or congregational organizations: there will be a formal or de facto structure of rabbinic authority that is responsible for the members of the community. However, Hasidic communities do not have a mere rabbi: they have a Rebbe , who plays a similar role but is thought to have a special connection to God. The Rebbes' authority, then, is based on a spiritual connection to God and so they are venerated in a different way from rabbis.\n\nAccording to the Talmud, it is a commandment ( mitzvah ) to honor a rabbi and a Torah scholar, along with the elderly, as it is written in Leviticus 19:32, \"Rise up before the elderly, and honor the aged.\" One should stand in their presence and address them with respect. Kohanim (priests) are required to honor rabbis and Torah scholars like the general public. However, if one is more learned than the rabbi or the scholar there is no need to stand. The spouse of a Torah scholar must also be shown deference. It is also a commandment for teachers and rabbis to honor their students. Rabbis and Torah scholars, in order to ensure discipline within the Jewish community, have the authority to place individuals who insult them under a ban of excommunication. \n\nThe first recorded examples of ordination are Moses transmitting his authority to Joshua and the 70 elders. Similarly, Elijah transmitted his authority to Elisha . \n\nAccording to Pirkei Avot , ordination was transmitted without interruption from Moses to Joshua, to the elders, to the prophets, to the men of the Great Assembly , to the Zugot , to the Tannaim . The chain of semikhah was probably lost in the 4th or 5th century, though possibly as late as the 12th century.\n\nAccording to Maimonides (12th century), if it were possible to gather the greatest sages of the generation, a reconstituted court could confer classic semikhah or ordination. Since then, a number of modern attempts to revive the Sanhedrin have been made. So far, no such attempt has been accepted as valid among the consensus of rabbis, or persisted for longer than about a century.\n\nSince the end of classical ordination, other forms of ordination have developed which use much of the same terminology, but have a lesser significance in Jewish law.\n\nNowadays, a rabbinical student is awarded semikhah (rabbinic ordination) after the completion of a learning program in a yeshiva or modern rabbinical seminary or under the guidance of an individual rabbi. The exact course of study varies by denomination, but most are in the range of 3–6 years. The programs all include study of Talmud, the codes of Jewish law and responsa to a greater or lesser extent, depending on the branch of Judaism. In addition to rabbinical literature, modern seminaries offer courses in pastoral subjects such as counseling, education, comparative religion and delivering sermons. Most rabbinical students will complete their studies in their mid-20s. There is no hierarchy and no central authority in Judaism that either supervises rabbinic education or records ordinations; each branch of Judaism regulates the ordination of the rabbis affiliated with it.\n\nThe most common formula used on a certificate of semikhah is Yore yore (\"He may teach, he may teach\", sometimes rendered as a question and answer, \"May he teach? He may teach.\"). Most Rabbis hold this qualification; they are sometimes called a moreh hora'ah (\"a teacher of rulings\"). A more advanced form of semikhah is yadin yadin (\"He may judge, he may judge\" or \"May he judge? He may judge.\"). This enables the recipient to serve as a judge on a rabbinical court and adjudicate cases of monetary law, among other responsibilities. The recipient of this ordination can be formally addressed as a dayan (\"judge\") and also retain the title of rabbi. Only a small percentage of rabbis earn the yadin yadin ordination. Although not strictly necessary, many Orthodox rabbis hold that a beth din (court of Jewish law) should be made up of dayanim with this ordination.\n\nAn Orthodox semikhah requires the successful completion of a program encompassing Jewish law (\" Halakha \") and responsa in keeping with longstanding tradition. Orthodox rabbis typically study at yeshivas , \"colleges\" which provide Torah study generally, and increasingly at dedicated institutions known as kollelim ; both are also referred to as \" Talmudical/Rabbinical schools or academies \". In both cases, the program is effectively post-graduate , comprising two years on average, following at least four years' yeshiva study.\n\nIn achieving semikhah , rabbinical students work to gain knowledge in specific and relevant Talmudic sugyas , and their development in the Rishonim and Acharonim (early and late medieval commentators), leading to their application in Halakha —particularly as traced by the Tur .\nBuilding on this, is the study of those sections of the Shulchan Aruch (codified Jewish law)—together with its main commentaries —that pertain to daily-life questions (such as the laws of keeping kosher , Shabbat , and the laws of family purity ). An element of shimush , or \"apprenticeship\", is often also required.\n\nReligious Zionist and Modern Orthodox rabbinical students, such as those at the Hesder yeshivot and Yeshiva University respectively, additionally formally study hashkafa , i.e. the major elements of theology and philosophy and their application to contemporary questions, proceeding systematically through the classical rabbinic works here ; other students will have studied these works independently (see Yeshiva § Ethics, mysticism and philosophy ).\n\nThe entrance requirements for an Orthodox yeshiva include a strong background within Jewish law, liturgy, Talmudic study, and attendant languages (e.g., Hebrew , Aramaic and in some cases Yiddish ). Specifically, students are expected to have acquired deep analytic skills , and breadth, in Talmud before commencing their rabbinic studies. At the same time, since rabbinical studies typically flow from other yeshiva studies, those who seek semichah are typically not required to have completed a university education. Exceptions exist, such as Yeshiva University , which requires all rabbinical students to complete an undergraduate degree before entering the program, and a Masters or equivalent before ordination.\n\nHistorically, women could not become Orthodox rabbis. Starting in 2009, some Modern Orthodox institutions began ordaining women with the title of \" Maharat \", and later with titles including \"Rabbah\" and \"Rabbi\". This is currently a contested issue for many Orthodox institutions, leading some to seek alternate clerical titles and roles for women (see Women rabbis and Torah scholars § Orthodox Judaism , Toanot Rabniyot , and Yoetzet Halacha ). \n\nWhile some Haredi (including Hasidic ) yeshivas do grant official ordination to many students wishing to become rabbis, most of the students within the yeshivas engage in learning Torah or Talmud without the goal of becoming rabbis or holding any official positions. The curriculum for obtaining ordination as rabbis for Haredi scholars is the same as described above for all Orthodox students wishing to obtain the official title of \"Rabbi\" and to be recognized as such.\n\nWithin the Hasidic world, the positions of spiritual leadership are dynastically transmitted within established families, usually from fathers to sons, while a small number of students obtain official ordination to become dayanim (\"judges\") on religious courts , poskim (\"decisors\" of Jewish law ), as well as teachers in the Hasidic schools. The same is true for the non-Hasidic Litvish yeshivas that are controlled by dynastically transmitted rosh yeshivas and the majority of students will not become rabbis, even after many years of post-graduate kollel study.\n\nSome yeshivas, such as Yeshivas Chafetz Chaim and Yeshivas Ner Yisroel in Baltimore , Maryland, may encourage their students to obtain semichah and mostly serve as rabbis who teach in other yeshivas or Hebrew day schools. Other yeshivas, such as Yeshiva Chaim Berlin ( Brooklyn , New York) or the Mirrer Yeshiva (in Brooklyn and Jerusalem ), do not have an official \"semichah/rabbinical program\" to train rabbis, but provide semichah on an \"as needed\" basis if and when one of their senior students is offered a rabbinical position but only with the approval of their rosh yeshivas .\n\nHaredim will often prefer using Hebrew names for rabbinic titles based on older traditions, such as: Rav (denoting \"rabbi\"), HaRav (\"the rabbi\"), Moreinu HaRav (\"our teacher the rabbi\"), Moreinu (\"our teacher\"), Moreinu VeRabeinu HaRav (\"our teacher and our rabbi/master the rabbi\"), Moreinu VeRabeinu (\"our teacher and our rabbi/master\"), Rosh yeshiva (\"[the] head [of the] yeshiva\"), Rosh HaYeshiva (\"head [of] the yeshiva\"), \"Mashgiach\" (for Mashgiach ruchani ) (\"spiritual supervisor/guide\"), Mora DeAsra (\"teacher/decisor\" [of] the/this place\"), HaGaon (\"the genius\"), Rebbe (\"[our/my] rabbi\"), HaTzadik (\"the righteous/saintly\"), \"ADMOR\" (\"Adoneinu Moreinu VeRabeinu\") (\"our master, our teacher and our rabbi/master\") or often just plain Reb which is a shortened form of rebbe that can be used by, or applied to, any married Jewish male as the situation applies.\n\nNote: A rebbetzin (a Yiddish usage common among Ashkenazim ) or a rabbanit (in Hebrew and used among Sephardim ) is the official \"title\" used for, or by, the wife of any Orthodox, Haredi, or Hasidic rabbi. Rebbetzin may also be used as the equivalent of Reb and is sometimes abbreviated as such as well.\n\nConservative Judaism confers semikhah after the completion of a program in the codes of Jewish law and responsa in keeping with Jewish tradition. In addition to knowledge and mastery of the study of Talmud and halakhah , Conservative semikhah also requires that its rabbinical students receive intensive training in Tanakh , classical biblical commentaries, biblical criticism , Midrash , Kabbalah and Hasidut , the historical development of Judaism from antiquity to modernity, Jewish ethics, the halakhic methodology of Conservative responsa , classical and modern works of Jewish theology and philosophy, synagogue administration, pastoral care , chaplaincy , non-profit management, and navigating the modern world in a Jewish context. Entrance requirements to Conservative rabbinical study centers include a background within Jewish law and liturgy, familiarity with rabbinic literature , Talmud, etc., ritual observance according to Conservative halakha, and the completion of an undergraduate university degree. In accordance with national collegiate accreditation requirements, Conservative rabbinical students earn a Master of Arts in Rabbinic Literature in addition to receiving ordination.\nSee List of rabbinical schools § Conservative\n\nIn Reform Judaism rabbinic studies are mandated in pastoral care, the historical development of Judaism, academic biblical criticism, in addition to the study of traditional rabbinic texts. Rabbinical students also are required to gain practical rabbinic experience by working at a congregation as a rabbinic intern during each year of study from year one onwards. All Reform seminaries ordain women and openly LGBTQ people as rabbis and cantors .\nSee List of rabbinical schools § Reform\n\nThere are several possibilities for receiving rabbinic ordination in addition to seminaries maintained by the large Jewish denominations; these are the Academy for Jewish Religion in New York City, AJR in California , ALEPH Ordination Program, the Jewish Renewal Seminary online, Hebrew College in Boston, and Hebrew Seminary in Illinois .\nThe structure and curricula here are largely as at other non-Orthodox yeshivot.\n\nMore recently established are several non-traditional, and nondenominational (also called \"transdenominational\" or \"postdenominational\") seminaries. These grant semicha with lesser requirements re time, and with a modified curriculum, generally focusing on leadership and pastoral roles. These are JSLI , RSI , PRS , and Ateret Tzvi .\nThe Wolkowisk Mesifta is aimed at community professionals with significant knowledge and experience, and provides a tailored curriculum to each candidate.\n\nHistorically and until the present, recognition of a rabbi relates to a community's perception of the rabbi's competence to interpret Jewish law and act as a teacher on central matters within Judaism. More broadly speaking, it is also an issue of being a worthy successor to a sacred legacy.\n\nAs a result, there have always been greater or lesser disputes about the legitimacy and authority of rabbis. Historical examples include Samaritans and Karaites .\n\nThe divisions between Jewish denominations may have their most pronounced manifestation on whether rabbis from one denomination recognize the legitimacy or authority of rabbis in another.\n\nAs a general rule within Orthodoxy and among some in the Conservative movement, rabbis are reluctant to accept the authority of other rabbis whose Halakhic standards are not as strict as their own. In some cases, this leads to an outright rejection of even the legitimacy of other rabbis; in others, the more lenient rabbi may be recognized as a spiritual leader of a particular community but may not be accepted as a credible authority on Jewish law.\n\nThese debates cause great problems for recognition of Jewish marriages, conversions, and other life decisions that are touched by Jewish law. Orthodox rabbis do not recognize conversions by non-Orthodox rabbis. Conservative rabbis recognise all conversions done according to Halakha . Finally, the North American Reform and Reconstructionists recognize patrilineality , under certain circumstances, as a valid claim towards Judaism, whereas Conservative and Orthodox maintain the position expressed in the Talmud and Codes that one can be a Jew only through matrilineality (born of a Jewish mother) or through conversion to Judaism .\n\nWith few rare exceptions, Jewish women have historically been excluded from serving as rabbis. This changed in the 1970s; coinciding with the shift in American society involving second-wave feminism , the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion began ordaining women as rabbis. Today, Jewish women serve as rabbis within all progressive branches of Judaism, while in Orthodox Judaism women rabbis is a contested matter, though many communities allow alternate clerical roles for women (see: Yoetzet Halacha ). A variety of modern titles have been coined for female rabbis, including Rabbah (רבה) ‎, Rabbanit (רבנית) ‎, and Maharat (מהר\"ת) ‎. ",
  "Club Atlético River Plate , commonly known as River Plate and abbreviated as CARP , is an Argentine professional sports club based in the Belgrano neighborhood of Buenos Aires . Founded in 1901, [ note1 1 ] the club is named after the English name for the city's estuary , Río de la Plata . River's home stadium, Estadio Monumental , is the largest in South America. River had the highest average home attendance of any association football club in the world in 2023 with 84,567. With more than 350,000 members at the end of 2023, River is one of the largest sports clubs by membership . River Plate is also considered one of the Big Five of Argentine football , along with Independiente , San Lorenzo , Boca Juniors , and Racing Club .\n\nAlthough a multi-sport club , River Plate is best known for its professional association football department, which has won Argentina's Primera División championship a record 38 times , most recently in 2023 . River Plate have also won 16 national cups , making River Argentina's most successful team in domestic competitions with 54 titles. At international level, River have won 18 titles, including four Copa Libertadores , one Intercontinental Cup , one Supercopa Sudamericana , one Copa Sudamericana , three Recopa Sudamericanas , one Copa Interamericana , one Suruga Bank Championship , a record five Copa Aldaos , and one Tie Cup . In addition, River Plate's reserve team won the U-20 Copa Libertadores in 2012 . After winning the 2014 Copa Sudamericana , 2015 Recopa Sudamericana and the 2015 Copa Libertadores , River Plate became the first team to simultaneously hold CONMEBOL 's three current major international competitions. \n\nRiver Plate are ranked first in the all-time Argentine Primera División table , having gained the most points, having played the most matches, and having the highest win percentage. River are also ranked first in the historical table of the Copa Libertadores , being the South American team with most games won and the most points gained. The club were placed ninth in the FIFA Club of the Century poll in 2000. In a survey published by the Argentine Football Association in 2016, 6 out of 11 players of the all-time greatest Argentina national team had played for River Plate. \n\nRiver have a fierce rivalry with Boca Juniors . Matches between them are known as Superclásico , and the rivalry is among the most heated in the sport, due to the fixture's global popularity and both clubs having the most fans in Argentina. Notable players who have played for River include José Manuel Moreno , Adolfo Pedernera , Ángel Labruna , Amadeo Carrizo , Alfredo Di Stéfano , Omar Sívori , Daniel Passarella , Enzo Francescoli , Hernán Crespo , Javier Mascherano and Gonzalo Higuaín .\n\nAccording with the club's official history, River Plate was founded on 25 May 1901, [ note1 1 ] close to the La Boca neighborhood (later the home of fierce rivals Boca Juniors ). They were formed from the merger of two clubs, \"Santa Rosa\" and \"La Rosales\", with Leopoldo Bard elected as the first president. The name River Plate was chosen because of an incident during the construction of Buenos Aires Port: one of the members had seen how the workers of Dique nº 3 left their duties for a while to play a football match. The boxes they were working with just said \"The River Plate\" (the name the English gave to the Río de la Plata ) and that inscription was taken to name the new club.\n\nRiver Plate affiliated to the Argentine Football Association in 1905, debuting in the third division against Facultad de Medicina. On 13 December 1908, the team was promoted to first division after beating Racing Club 2–1. However, the match was declared null due to River supporters jumping onto the field to celebrate with the players, so a new match had to be played. River again won, this time 7–0, to achieve promotion.\n\nIn 1914 River won its first domestic championship, the Copa de Competencia Jockey Club and its first international title, the Copa de Competencia Chevallier Boutell . The nickname Los Millonarios came after the acquisition of winger Carlos Peucelle in 1931 for $10,000 and Bernabé Ferreyra for $35,000 (Large sum of money for the period) in 1932 .\n\nIn the following years, River Plate consolidated its place as one of the most popular teams of Argentina, and the 20th century brought much success. The club's record of 28 official tournaments saw them dubbed El Campeón del Siglo (The Champions of the Century). \n\nAdidas has been River Plate's uniform supplier since 1982, becoming one of the company's largest sponsorship deals in the world, only behind German club Bayern Munich . The US$60 million partnership with the German sports company signed in 2015 (extending the deal to 2021) marked the most expensive kit agreement in the history of Argentine football. \n\nAs in many football shirts and sports in general, the team's jersey has a badge on its front, as a symbol of the institution. When the River Plate jersey was created it did not have a badge, and its presence varied throughout the history, according to the designs of each era. Currently it is embroidered on the jersey, with three colors (red, white and black). Its format resembles that of the jersey, as it has a red stripe that crosses it, along with the acronym of the club (CARP) in black, and the background is white, in a stylized design.\n\nWhen Hugo Santilli became chairman in 1984, he soon called to a competition where a new emblem would be chosen. The main objective of this new image was to eradicate the nickname Gallinas (Hens) that River's rivals (Boca Juniors fans mainly) used to mock them. Artists from Argentina took part in that competition. The club finally chose a logo designed by the artist Caloi . This emblem showed the figure of a lion (wearing a River jersey) rising from the Monumental stadium. The lion logo was immediately added to the uniforms (on the field and training clothes) having River Plate won the Copa Libertadores de América and European/South American Cup using the lion logo. In 1989, when Santilli left the club so the lion went with him and has not been reestablished since. \n\nIn February 2022, River Plate launched its new corporate image, which included an update to the logo and a typography designed exclusively for the club. The corporate image was created and developed by \"Grupo Berro\", a branding and design studio that had been working on the corporate image for over two years. \n\nRiver Plate and Boca Juniors are the two largest football clubs in Argentina, with more than half the country's football fans supporting the clubs. Due to the rivalry between them, the Boca Juniors vs River Plate Superclásico local derby match was listed by the BBC as one of the most famous derbies in the world. Attending the match was also acclaimed in 2004 as the number one of the Fifty sporting things you must do before you die by The Observer . \n\nThe \"River Plate\" name was chosen in 1901, when the team was still located at the La Boca neighbourhood, next to the Río de la Plata (\"River Plate\" in some English sources). Proposed names as \"Club Atlético Forward\", \"Juventud Boquense\" or \"La Rosales\" had been rejected. Pedro Martínez saw the name \"The River Plate\" written at ship containers, and proposed it as a name, which was finally accepted as the official name. \n\nRiver fans and the press are fond of the nickname Los Millonarios (The Millionaires). This name derives from the 1930s after some expensive transfers of players from other clubs, including Carlos Peucelle from Sportivo Buenos Aires in 1931 and Bernabé Ferreyra from Tigre in 1932. \n\nDue to the red band in their shirt, it is also common to refer to River as El Equipo de la Banda (the team with the band) or simply La Banda (which means \"the stripe\", but can also mean \"the band\" -both as in \"gang\" and \"musical group\"). River Plate's forwards between 1941 and 1946 were given the nickname La Máquina (The Machine), due to their synchronization and movements on the field. \n\nThere was also a River Plate team that was known as La Maquinita (The Little Machine, as tribute to its predecessor) in the 1950s. Managed by José María Minella , the team earned the nickname after winning five championships in six years (1952–57). Some notable players were Alfredo Di Stéfano , Santiago Vernazza , Walter Gómez , Enrique Omar Sívori , among others. Some members of the original Máquina of the 1940s such as Labruna and Loustau, were also part of the team. \n\nThe Estadio Antonio Liberti (nicknamed El Monumental ) located in the Belgrano neighborhood of Buenos Aires is River Plate's stadium. With a capacity of 86,000, it was inaugurated on 25 May 1938. Argentina national football team usually plays its home games at the stadium.\n\nSince its establishment in 1901, River Plate's stadiums have been: \n\nIn 2023, River's average home attendance was 84,567, the highest average attendance of any association football club in the world, also having sold-out 48 home matches in a row during the year. It was also reported that River had more than 350,000 members at the end of 2023, making them one of the largest sports clubs by membership . \n\nOn 8 October 2012, \"The world's longest football flag\" was unveiled in a caravan in which approximately 15,000 River supporters took part. It was made entirely by fans who carried the 7,830 meters flag along the streets of Buenos Aires. The away jersey of the 2012–13 season was the most sold throughout the world during the month of September 2012, a first for an Argentine club. In 2015, the club participated in the FIFA Club World Cup and played against Sanfrecce Hiroshima at the Nagai Stadium in Osaka on 16 December, and on 20 December in the final against FC Barcelona at the International Stadium Yokohama . The number of River Plate supporters who traveled to Japan during that period were between 15,000 and 20,000, a record in the competition. \n\nRiver Plate has official subsidiaries in provinces such as Santa Fe , Tucumán , Córdoba , Entre Ríos , Mendoza , Tierra del Fuego , Catamarca , among others, and in Spain, Mexico, Australia, the United States, Paraguay and Canada. There are also unofficial fan clubs in all Latin American countries, and also in Spain, Italy, England, Israel, Australia, Germany, the United States and New Zealand. \n\nNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules ; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.\n\nNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules ; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.\n\nNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules ; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.\n\nFrom its creation in 1901 to the present, the lower divisions of River Plate have protagonized splendid moments in their categories.\nThe River Plate Academy is recognized on a continental and world level for the amount of talents that have emerged throughout it. River produced many of the best players in the history of football, including most of the institution's top idols. Its main objective is to supply players with great future to the first team and educate academically, ethically and athletically its members. Legends of football not only had the privilege of playing in the first division of the club Millonario , but also wore the red and white jersey since the youth categories. The lower divisions of River Plate, also known as \"El Semillero\" has always been the most fruitful of Argentina , the most important and also the one with the greatest success. Historically it is considered as the best soccer training school of the Americas and one of the best in the world. \n\nTwo players from the River Plate academy won the Ballon d'Or . Note : flags indicate national team they played for so the Ballon was awarded to European players only:\n\n(according to a ranking made by IFFHS); Note : the ranking only includes River Plate players emerged from the youth academy: \n\nNotable players who emerged from the River Plate Academy\n\nMarcelo Gallardo is the club's most successful manager of all-time, with thirteen titles. Gallardo (appointed in 2014) was the club's manager until November 2022 and under his direction, River Plate won most of its international championships. Domestic titles won include three Copa Argentina ( 2015–16 , 2016–17 and 2018–19 ) and two Supercopa Argentina ( 2017 , 2019 ). He has been specially successful in the international scene, having won two Copa Libertadores ( 2015 , 2018 ), one Copa Sudamericana ( 2014 ), three Recopa Sudamericana ( 2015 , 2016 , 2019 ), and one Suruga Bank Championship ( 2015 ). Several of these championship wins included memorable victories against archrivals Boca Juniors .\n\nRamón Díaz had three tenures on River Plate (1995–2000, 2001–02, and 2012–14), being the club's most successful manager in the domestic scene, having achieved six Primera División titles ( 1996–97 Torneo Apertura , 1996–97 Torneo Clausura , 1997–98 Torneo Apertura , 1999–2000 Torneo Apertura , 2001–02 Torneo Clausura , 2013–14 Torneo Final ) and one Copa Campeonato ( 2014 ) ; internationally, he won the Copa Libertadores ( 1996 ) and one Supercopa Libertadores ( 1997 ).\n\nJosé María Minella was another notable manager with eight titles won with River Plate, seven Primera División championships ( 1945 , 1947 , 1952 , 1953 , 1955 , 1956 , 1957 ) and one Copa Dr. Ricardo Aldao (1947).\n\nÁngel Labruna had an outstanding career not only as player (he is club's all-time topscorer with 293 goals in 515 matches played), but as coach for the club, having won six Primera División championships ( 1975 Torneo Metropolitano, 1975 Torneo Nacional , 1977 Torneo Metropolitano , 1979 Torneo Nacional, 1979 Torneo Metropolitano , and 1980 Torneo Metropolitano ).\n\nHéctor Veira won the Copa Libertadores with River Plate, in 1986 . That same year the team won the European/South American Cup played in Tokyo. Under his coaching the club also won the 1985–86 Argentine championship , totalizing three titles with River Plate.\n\nTitles won in lower divisions:\n\nApart from football, the club hosts a large variety of sports such as athletics , basque pelota , bowls , chess , basketball , handball , cestoball , gymnastics , field hockey , karate , roller hockey , roller skating , swimming , taekwondo , tennis , volleyball , waterpolo , and eSports .\n\nThe basketball team currently plays in the Torneo Federal de Básquetbol. In 1950, the first FIBA World Championship was played in Buenos Aires and Argentina claimed the gold medal with 3 River Plate players: Alberto López , Leopoldo Contarbio and Vito Liva. The club won a Campeonato Argentino title in 1983, and finished in the 2nd place in the Campeonato Sudamericano de Clubes Campeones de Básquetbol in 1984.\n\nThe last edition of the Campeonato Argentino was held in that year, and River Plate was defeated in the finals, then playing at its successor competition, Liga Nacional de Básquetbol , between 1985–93 and 2004–06. The team reached the finals in 1988, and for the 1989 and 1990 seasons, Héctor Campana became the top scorer of the LNB , playing for River Plate. The team also achieved 2nd place in 2004 and 2005 editions of Copa Argentina. Since 2014, after eight years of absence in professional basketball, River Plate returned to national tournaments playing the CABB Federal Basketball Tournament. \n\nThe women's field hockey team is affiliated to the Buenos Aires Hockey Association (AHBA) and currently playing in Torneo Metropolitano A , the top division of regional hockey in Argentina.\n\nIn 2016, the squad (nicknamed Las Vikingas ) won its first Metropolitano championship after beating Ciudad de Buenos Aires by 3–2 at the final. \n\nIn 2017, Las Vikingas won their third consecutive Hockey National League after defeating Club Italiano by 2–0 at the final, thus becoming one of the two clubs with most titles at the national tournament. \n\nTwo players from River Plate, Lucina von der Heyde and Bianca Donati , who were Junior World Champions in Chile 2016 , made their debut in a world cup in London 2018 . Von der Heyde was named the FIH Rising Star of the Year . \n\nThe futsal team plays in the Argentine División de Honor . The team won three championships in 1991, 2002 and 2003, and two Copa Argentina de Futsal in 2016 and 2017. The team also achieved a third place in the Copa Libertadores de Futsal in 2013. \n\nRiver is one of the founding clubs of the Federación Metropolitana de Balonmano (Fe.Me.Bal.) and it is also the institution that won more championships in local history. \n\nAll these titles have been obtained in the metropolitan and national levels, either in Metropolitan, Aperturas, Clausuras, Super 4 or Nacionales Tournaments, or the Federal League. The men's team won 32 domestic titles and the gold medal in the South American Men's Club Handball Championship in 1984. The team also achieved 2 Bronze medals in the same competition and 4 Bronze medals in the Pan American Men's Club Handball Championship . The women's team won 9 national titles, and the silver medal in the South American Women's Club Handball Championship in 1984 and the bronze medal in 1987. \n\nThe more prominent players in the club's history are Guillermo Till, Claudio Straffe, Freddy Ambrosini, Gabriel Canzoniero and Juan Ojea.\n\nThe current swimming team has its origins in 2003, after many years in which the Club Atlético River Plate had no representatives in the national championships of this discipline.\n\nThe draft to form the best team in the country was led by Professor Rodolfo Sacco and had the best results that had never been achieved in the institution. The team began to form from a contractual relationship with the swimmer José Meolans , one of the Argentine swimmers with most titles won. \n\nMany high-level swimmers, trained in other institutions began to approach to be part of what would be the best team in the country for the coming years. \n\nOther swimmers from River Plate who represented Argentina in the Olympics include Meolans himself, Georgina Bardach , Eduardo Germán Otero , Walter Arciprete , Agustín Fiorilli , María del Pilar Pereyra , Juan Pereyra , Damián Blaum , Javiera Salcedo , Pablo Martín Abal , Cecilia Biagioli .\n\nTennis is a sport practiced in River Plate since 1923. Currently, River Plate counts with 10 clay courts and one hard court. As in other disciplines, the Club stands out for its large number of teams participating in the official tournaments organized by the Asociación Argentina de Tenis, as well as having important activities and competitions for the development of this sport in the country. \n\nGabriela Sabatini , who is considered the best Argentine women's tennis player in history and an icon in national women's sport, began practicing at River at age 6, under the direction of Professor Daniel Fidalgo, with whom she trained for seven years. When she was 12 years old, she participated in the Mundialito Infantil de Caracas, winning the competition, and ratifying once again the talent she had already shown during her participation in metropolitan and national children's tournaments. \n\nRiver Plate Women's division reached the national title four times, being one of the top champions of the league and the first to be champion three consecutive times (2005 to 2007). \n\nThe men's volleyball team won the Liga Argentina de Voleibol in the 1998–99 season with the Brazilians Jefferson, Marcos Dreyer, and the nationals Marcelo Román, Diego Gutiérrez and Luis Gálvez and the Súper 4 in 2003. The team also won 8 Metropolitan Leagues between 1956 and 2011.\n\nThe River Plate women's football team plays in the Campeonato de Fútbol Femenino and have won the championship 11 times of which five were in succession from 1993 to 1997. The team achieved the third place in the 2017 Copa Libertadores Femenina .\n\nIn addition to the mentioned sports, River Plate's sections include artistic gymnastics , artistic roller skating , athletics , basque pelota , boxing , bowls , chess , karate , rhythmic gymnastics , roller hockey , taekwondo , table tennis and waterpolo .",
  "The Council of Government (French: Conseil de gouvernement ) of Monaco is the Prince 's governing body .\nIt consists of six members:\n\nMinister of State , who chairs the council, and the five members (four counsellors and one delegate); he also has voting rights, and has control of both the police and military .\n\nThe Council debates projects and bills proposed to the Prince by the other governmental councils, executive ordinances approved by the Prince, the Minister of State's ministerial orders , and other miscellaneous policy.\n\n43°43′54″N 7°25′30″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.7317°N 7.4250°E ﻿ / 43.7317; 7.4250\n\nThis article about politics in Monaco is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "The Constantijn Huygens Prize (Dutch: Constantijn Huygens-prijs ) is a Dutch literary award . \n\nSince 1947, it has been awarded each year for an author's complete works by the Jan Campert Foundation (Dutch: Jan Campert-Stichting ), a foundation named in honor of the Dutch writer Jan Campert who died while helping Jews during World War II. The award is named after Constantijn Huygens , a 17th-century Dutch poet, diplomat, scholar and composer.\n\nAs of 2019 [update] it comes with a monetary award of €12,000. \n\nThere was no prize awarded in 1968. In 1982, Jan Wolkers refused to accept the award.",
  "El Ateneo Grand Splendid is a bookshop in Buenos Aires , Argentina . In 2008, The Guardian placed it as the second most beautiful bookshop in the world. In 2019, it was named the \"world's most beautiful bookstore\" by the National Geographic . \n\nSituated on Santa Fe Avenue in Barrio Norte , the building was designed by architects Peró and Torres Armengol for impresario Max Glücksmann (1875-1946), and opened as a theatre called Teatro Gran Splendid in May 1919. The eclecticist building features ceiling frescoes painted by the Italian artist Nazareno Orlandi and caryatids sculpted by Troiano Troiani, whose work also graces the cornice along the Palacio de la Legislatura de la Ciudad de Buenos Aires .\n\nThe theatre had a seating capacity of 1,050, and staged a variety of performances, including appearances by the tango artists Carlos Gardel , Francisco Canaro , Roberto Firpo and Ignacio Corsini . Glücksmann started his own radio station in 1924 ( Radio Splendid ), which broadcast from the building where his recording company, Nacional Odeón , made some of the early recordings of the great tango singers of the day. In the late twenties the theatre was converted into a cinema, and in 1929 showed the first sound films presented in Argentina.\n\nThe ornate former theatre was leased by Grupo Ilhsa in February 2000. Ilhsa, through Tematika, owns El Ateneo and Yenny booksellers (totaling over 40 stores), as well as the El Ateneo publishing house. The building was subsequently renovated and converted into a book and music shop under the direction of architect Fernando Manzone; the cinema seating was removed and in its place book shelves were installed. Following refurbishment works, the 2,000 m 2 (22,000 sq ft) El Ateneo Grand Splendid became the group's flagship store, and in 2007 sold over 700,000 books; over a million people walk through its doors annually.\n\nCustomer seating has been installed throughout the building, including the still-intact theatre boxes, and a café has been created at the back of what was once the stage. The ceiling, the ornate carvings, the crimson stage curtains, the auditorium lighting and many architectural details remain. Despite the changes, the building still retains the feeling of the grand theatre it once was. The Guardian , a prominent British periodical, named El Ateneo Grand Splendid second in its 2008 list of the world's ten best bookshops. In 2019, it was named the \"world's most beautiful bookstore\" by the National Geographic . ",
  "The eukaryotes ( / j uː ˈ k ær i oʊ t s , - ə t s / yoo- KARR -ee-ohts, -⁠əts ) constitute the domain of Eukaryota or Eukarya , organisms whose cells have a membrane-bound nucleus . All animals , plants , fungi , seaweeds , and many unicellular organisms are eukaryotes. They constitute a major group of life forms alongside the two groups of prokaryotes : the Bacteria and the Archaea . Eukaryotes represent a small minority of the number of organisms, but given their generally much larger size, their collective global biomass is much larger than that of prokaryotes.\n\nThe eukaryotes emerged within the archaeal kingdom Promethearchaeati and its sole phylum Promethearchaeota . This implies that there are only two domains of life , Bacteria and Archaea, with eukaryotes incorporated among the Archaea. Eukaryotes first emerged during the Paleoproterozoic , likely as flagellated cells. The leading evolutionary theory is they were created by symbiogenesis between an anaerobic Promethearchaeati archaean and an aerobic proteobacterium , which formed the mitochondria . A second episode of symbiogenesis with a cyanobacterium created the plants, with chloroplasts .\n\nEukaryotic cells contain membrane-bound organelles such as the nucleus , the endoplasmic reticulum , and the Golgi apparatus . Eukaryotes may be either unicellular or multicellular . In comparison, prokaryotes are typically unicellular. Unicellular eukaryotes are sometimes called protists . Eukaryotes can reproduce both asexually through mitosis and sexually through meiosis and gamete fusion ( fertilization ).\n\nThe word eukaryote is derived from the Greek words \"eu\" (εὖ) meaning \"true\" or \"good\" and \"karyon\" (κάρυον) meaning \"nut\" or \"kernel\", referring to the nucleus of a cell . \n\nEukaryotes are organisms that range from microscopic single cells , such as picozoans under 3 micrometres across, to animals like the blue whale , weighing up to 190 tonnes and measuring up to 33.6 metres (110 ft) long, or plants like the coast redwood , up to 120 metres (390 ft) tall. Many eukaryotes are unicellular; the informal grouping called protists includes many of these, with some multicellular forms like the giant kelp up to 200 feet (61 m) long. The multicellular eukaryotes include the animals, plants, and fungi , but again, these groups too contain many unicellular species . Eukaryotic cells are typically much larger than those of prokaryotes —the bacteria and the archaea —having a volume of around 10,000 times greater. Eukaryotes represent a small minority of the number of organisms , but, as many of them are much larger, their collective global biomass (468 gigatons) is far larger than that of prokaryotes (77 gigatons), with plants alone accounting for over 81% of the total biomass of Earth . \n\nThe eukaryotes are a diverse lineage, consisting mainly of microscopic organisms . Multicellularity in some form has evolved independently at least 25 times within the eukaryotes. Complex multicellular organisms, not counting the aggregation of amoebae to form slime molds , have evolved within only six eukaryotic lineages: animals , symbiomycotan fungi , brown algae , red algae , green algae , and land plants . Eukaryotes are grouped by genomic similarities, so that groups often lack visible shared characteristics. \n\nThe defining feature of eukaryotes is that their cells have a well-defined, membrane-bound nuclei , distinguishing them from prokaryotes that lack such a structure. Eukaryotic cells have a variety of internal membrane-bound structures, called organelles , and a cytoskeleton which defines the cell's organization and shape. The nucleus stores the cell's DNA , which is divided into linear bundles called chromosomes ; these are separated into two matching sets by a microtubular spindle during nuclear division, in the distinctively eukaryotic process of mitosis . \n\nEukaryotes differ from prokaryotes in multiple ways, with unique biochemical pathways such as sterane synthesis. The eukaryotic signature proteins have no homology to proteins in other domains of life, but appear to be universal among eukaryotes. They include the proteins of the cytoskeleton, the complex transcription machinery, the membrane-sorting systems, the nuclear pore , and some enzymes in the biochemical pathways. \n\nEukaryote cells include a variety of membrane-bound structures, together forming the endomembrane system. Simple compartments, called vesicles and vacuoles , can form by budding off other membranes. Many cells ingest food and other materials through a process of endocytosis , where the outer membrane invaginates and then pinches off to form a vesicle. Some cell products can leave in a vesicle through exocytosis . \n\nThe nucleus is surrounded by a double membrane known as the nuclear envelope , with nuclear pores that allow material to move in and out. Various tube- and sheet-like extensions of the nuclear membrane form the endoplasmic reticulum , which is involved in protein transport and maturation. It includes the rough endoplasmic reticulum, covered in ribosomes which synthesize proteins; these enter the interior space or lumen. Subsequently, they generally enter vesicles, which bud off from the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. In most eukaryotes, these protein-carrying vesicles are released and their contents further modified in stacks of flattened vesicles ( cisternae ), the Golgi apparatus . \n\nVesicles may be specialized; for instance, lysosomes contain digestive enzymes that break down biomolecules in the cytoplasm. \n\nMitochondria are organelles in eukaryotic cells. The mitochondrion is commonly called \"the powerhouse of the cell\", for its function providing energy by oxidising sugars or fats to produce the energy-storing molecule ATP . Mitochondria have two surrounding membranes , each a phospholipid bilayer , the inner of which is folded into invaginations called cristae where aerobic respiration takes place. \n\nMitochondria contain their own DNA , which has close structural similarities to bacterial DNA , from which it originated, and which encodes rRNA and tRNA genes that produce RNA which is closer in structure to bacterial RNA than to eukaryote RNA. \n\nSome eukaryotes, such as the metamonads Giardia and Trichomonas , and the amoebozoan Pelomyxa , appear to lack mitochondria, but all contain mitochondrion-derived organelles, like hydrogenosomes or mitosomes , having lost their mitochondria secondarily. They obtain energy by enzymatic action in the cytoplasm. It is thought that mitochondria developed from prokaryotic cells which became endosymbionts living inside eukaryotes. \n\nPlants and various groups of algae have plastids as well as mitochondria. Plastids, like mitochondria, have their own DNA and are developed from endosymbionts , in this case cyanobacteria . They usually take the form of chloroplasts which, like cyanobacteria, contain chlorophyll and produce organic compounds (such as glucose ) through photosynthesis . Others are involved in storing food. Although plastids probably had a single origin, not all plastid-containing groups are closely related. Instead, some eukaryotes have obtained them from others through secondary endosymbiosis or ingestion. The capture and sequestering of photosynthetic cells and chloroplasts, kleptoplasty , occurs in many types of modern eukaryotic organisms. \n\nThe cytoskeleton provides stiffening structure and points of attachment for motor structures that enable the cell to move, change shape, or transport materials. The motor structures are microfilaments of actin and actin-binding proteins , including α- actinin , fimbrin , and filamin are present in submembranous cortical layers and bundles. Motor proteins of microtubules, dynein and kinesin , and myosin of actin filaments, provide dynamic character of the network. \n\nMany eukaryotes have long slender motile cytoplasmic projections, called flagella , or multiple shorter structures called cilia . These organelles are variously involved in movement, feeding, and sensation. They are composed mainly of tubulin , and are entirely distinct from prokaryotic flagella. They are supported by a bundle of microtubules arising from a centriole , characteristically arranged as nine doublets surrounding two singlets. Flagella may have hairs ( mastigonemes ), as in many stramenopiles . Their interior is continuous with the cell's cytoplasm . \n\nCentrioles are often present, even in cells and groups that do not have flagella, but conifers and flowering plants have neither. They generally occur in groups that give rise to various microtubular roots. These form a primary component of the cytoskeleton, and are often assembled over the course of several cell divisions, with one flagellum retained from the parent and the other derived from it. Centrioles produce the spindle during nuclear division. \n\nThe cells of plants, algae, fungi and most chromalveolates , but not animals, are surrounded by a cell wall. This is a layer outside the cell membrane , providing the cell with structural support, protection, and a filtering mechanism. The cell wall also prevents over-expansion when water enters the cell. \n\nThe major polysaccharides making up the primary cell wall of land plants are cellulose , hemicellulose , and pectin . The cellulose microfibrils are linked together with hemicellulose, embedded in a pectin matrix. The most common hemicellulose in the primary cell wall is xyloglucan . \n\nEukaryotes have a life cycle that involves sexual reproduction , alternating between a haploid phase, where only one copy of each chromosome is present in each cell, and a diploid phase, with two copies of each chromosome in each cell. The diploid phase is formed by fusion of two haploid gametes, such as eggs and spermatozoa , to form a zygote ; this may grow into a body, with its cells dividing by mitosis , and at some stage produce haploid gametes through meiosis , a division that reduces the number of chromosomes and creates genetic variability . There is considerable variation in this pattern. Plants have both haploid and diploid multicellular phases . Eukaryotes have lower metabolic rates and longer generation times than prokaryotes, because they are larger and therefore have a smaller surface area to volume ratio. \n\nThe evolution of sexual reproduction may be a primordial characteristic of eukaryotes. Based on a phylogenetic analysis, Dacks and Roger have proposed that facultative sex was present in the group's common ancestor. A core set of genes that function in meiosis is present in both Trichomonas vaginalis and Giardia intestinalis , two organisms previously thought to be asexual. Since these two species are descendants of lineages that diverged early from the eukaryotic evolutionary tree, core meiotic genes, and hence sex, were likely present in the common ancestor of eukaryotes. Species once thought to be asexual, such as Leishmania parasites, have a sexual cycle. Amoebae, previously regarded as asexual, may be anciently sexual; while present-day asexual groups could have arisen recently. \n\nIn antiquity , the two lineages of animals and plants were recognized by Aristotle and Theophrastus . The lineages were given the taxonomic rank of kingdom by Linnaeus in the 18th century. Though he included the fungi with plants with some reservations, it was later realized that they are quite distinct and warrant a separate kingdom. The various single-cell eukaryotes were originally placed with plants or animals when they became known. In 1818, the German biologist Georg A. Goldfuss coined the word Protozoa to refer to organisms such as ciliates , and this group was expanded until Ernst Haeckel made it a kingdom encompassing all single-celled eukaryotes, the Protista , in 1866. The eukaryotes thus came to be seen as four kingdoms:\n\nThe protists were at that time thought to be \"primitive forms\", and thus an evolutionary grade , united by their primitive unicellular nature. Understanding of the oldest branchings in the tree of life only developed substantially with DNA sequencing , leading to a system of domains rather than kingdoms as top level rank being put forward by Carl Woese , Otto Kandler , and Mark Wheelis in 1990, uniting all the eukaryote kingdoms in the domain \"Eucarya\", stating, however, that \" 'eukaryotes' will continue to be an acceptable common synonym\". In 1996, the evolutionary biologist Lynn Margulis proposed to replace kingdoms and domains with \"inclusive\" names to create a \"symbiosis-based phylogeny\", giving the description \"Eukarya (symbiosis-derived nucleated organisms)\". \n\nBy 2014, a rough consensus started to emerge from the phylogenomic studies of the previous two decades. The majority of eukaryotes can be placed in one of two large clades dubbed Amorphea (similar in composition to the unikont hypothesis) and the Diphoda (formerly bikonts), which includes plants and most algal lineages. A third major grouping, the Excavata , has been abandoned as a formal group as it was found to be paraphyletic . The proposed phylogeny below includes two groups of excavates ( Discoba and Metamonada ), and incorporates the 2021 proposal that picozoans are close relatives of rhodophytes. The Provora are a group of microbial predators discovered in 2022. \n\nAncyromonadida\n\nMalawimonada\n\nCRuMs\n\nAmoebozoa\n\nBreviatea\n\nApusomonadida\n\nHolomycota (inc. fungi)\n\nHolozoa (inc. animals)\n\n? Metamonada\n\nDiscoba\n\nCryptista\n\nRhodophyta (red algae)\n\nPicozoa\n\nGlaucophyta\n\nViridiplantae (plants)\n\nHemimastigophora\n\nProvora\n\nHaptista\n\nTelonemia\n\nRhizaria\n\nAlveolata\n\nStramenopiles\n\nOne view of the great kingdoms and their stem groups. The Metamonada are hard to place, being sister possibly to Discoba or to Malawimonada or being a paraphyletic group external to all other eukaryotes . \n\nThe origin of the eukaryotic cell, or eukaryogenesis , is a milestone in the evolution of life, since eukaryotes include all complex cells and almost all multicellular organisms. The last eukaryotic common ancestor (LECA) is the hypothetical origin of all living eukaryotes, and was most likely a biological population , not a single individual. The LECA is believed to have been a protist with a nucleus, at least one centriole and flagellum , facultatively aerobic mitochondria, sex ( meiosis and syngamy ), a dormant cyst with a cell wall of chitin or cellulose , and peroxisomes . \n\nAn endosymbiotic union between a motile anaerobic archaean and an aerobic alphaproteobacterium gave rise to the LECA and all eukaryotes, with mitochondria . A second, much later endosymbiosis with a cyanobacterium gave rise to the ancestor of plants, with chloroplasts . \n\nThe presence of eukaryotic biomarkers in archaea points towards an archaeal origin. The genomes of Promethearchaeati archaea have plenty of eukaryotic signature protein genes, which play a crucial role in the development of the cytoskeleton and complex cellular structures characteristic of eukaryotes. In 2022, cryo-electron tomography demonstrated that Promethearchaeati archaea have a complex actin -based cytoskeleton, providing the first direct visual evidence of the archaeal ancestry of eukaryotes. \n\nThe timing of the origin of eukaryotes is hard to determine, but the discovery of Qingshania magnificia , the earliest multicelluar eukaryote from North China which lived 1.635 billion years ago, suggests that the crown group eukaryotes originated from the late Paleoproterozoic ( Statherian ). The earliest unequivocal unicellular eukaryotes, Tappania plana , Shuiyousphaeridium macroreticulatum , Dictyosphaera macroreticulata , Germinosphaera alveolata , and Valeria lophostriata from North China, lived approximately 1.65 billion years ago. \n\nSome acritarchs are known from at least 1.65 billion years ago, and a fossil, Grypania , which may be an alga, is as much as 2.1 billion years old. The \"problematic\" fossil Diskagma has been found in paleosols 2.2 billion years old. \n\nThe Neoarchean fossil Thuchomyces shares similarities with eukaryotes, specifically fungi. It especially resembles the problematic fossil Diskagma , with hyphae and multiple differentiated layers. However, it is over 600 million years older than all other possible eukaryotes, and many of its \"eukaryote features\" are not specific to the clade, meaning it is almost certainly a microbial mat instead. \n\nStructures proposed to represent \"large colonial organisms\" have been found in the black shales of the Palaeoproterozoic such as the Francevillian B Formation , in Gabon , dubbed the \" Francevillian biota \" which is dated at 2.1 billion years old. However, the status of these structures as fossils is contested, with other authors suggesting that they might represent pseudofossils . The oldest fossils that can unambiguously be assigned to eukaryotes are from the Ruyang Group of China, dating to approximately 1.8-1.6 billion years ago. Fossils that are clearly related to modern groups start appearing an estimated 1.2 billion years ago, in the form of red algae , though recent work suggests the existence of fossilized filamentous algae in the Vindhya basin dating back perhaps to 1.6 to 1.7 billion years ago. \n\nThe presence of steranes , eukaryotic-specific biomarkers , in Australian shales previously indicated that eukaryotes were present in these rocks dated at 2.7 billion years old, but these Archaean biomarkers have been rebutted as later contaminants. The oldest valid biomarker records are only around 800 million years old. In contrast, a molecular clock analysis suggests the emergence of sterol biosynthesis as early as 2.3 billion years ago. The nature of steranes as eukaryotic biomarkers is further complicated by the production of sterols by some bacteria. \n\nWhenever their origins, eukaryotes may not have become ecologically dominant until much later; a massive increase in the zinc composition of marine sediments 800 million years ago has been attributed to the rise of substantial populations of eukaryotes, which preferentially consume and incorporate zinc relative to prokaryotes, approximately a billion years after their origin (at the latest). ",
  "The poetry of the Ottoman Empire , or Ottoman Divan poetry, is little known outside modern Turkey , which forms the heartland of what was once the Ottoman Empire . It is, however, a rich and ancient poetic tradition that lasted for nearly 700 years, and one whose influence can still be felt in the modern Turkish poetic tradition .\n\nEven in modern Turkey, however, Ottoman Divan poetry is a highly specialist subject. Much of this has to do with the fact that Divan poetry is written in Ottoman Turkish , which was written using a variant of the Arabic script and made extensive use of Arabic and Persian words, making the language vastly different from modern Turkish . In its own time, knowledge of this form of literary Turkish was largely limited to the educated classes.\n\nThe Ottoman Divan poetry tradition embraced the influence of the Persian and, to a lesser extent, Arabic literatures. As far back as the pre-Ottoman Seljuk period in the late 11th to early 14th centuries CE, this influence was already being felt: the Seljuks conducted their official business in the Persian language, rather than in Turkish, and the poetry of the Seljuk court was highly inflected with Persian.\n\nWhen the Ottoman Empire arose in northwestern Anatolia , it continued this tradition. The most common poetic forms of the Ottoman court, for instance, were derived either directly from the Persian literary tradition (the gazel ; the mesnevî ), or indirectly through Persian from the Arabic (the kasîde ). However, the decision to adopt these poetic forms wholesale led to two important further consequences: \n\nOut of this confluence of choices, the Ottoman Turkish language—which was always highly distinct from standard Turkish—was effectively born. This style of writing under Persian and Arabic influence came to be known as \"Divan literature\" (Turkish divân edebiyatı ), as divân was the Ottoman Turkish word referring to the collected works of a poet.\n\nBeginning with the Tanzimat reform period (1839–1876) of Ottoman history and continuing until the dissolution of the empire in the early 20th century, the Divan poetic tradition steadily dwindled, and more and more influence from both Turkish folk literature and European literature began to make itself felt.\n\nKaside is generally about God, religious or government leaders and their values. Most famous poets are Ahmed Paşa , Necati , Bâkî , Nedîm , most importantly Nef'i .\n\nTerminology:",
  "Ligne claire ( French: [liɲ(ə) klɛːʁ] ; Dutch: klare lijn [ˈklaːrə ˈlɛin] ; both meaning \"clear line\") is a style of drawing created and pioneered by Hergé , the Belgian cartoonist and creator of The Adventures of Tintin . It uses clear strong lines sometimes of varied width and no hatching , while contrast is downplayed as well. Cast shadows are often illuminated, and the style often features strong colours and a combination of cartoonish characters against a realistic background. The name was coined by Joost Swarte in 1977. \n\nHergé started out drawing in a much looser, rougher style which was likely influenced by American comic strip artists of the late 1920s and 1930s, such as Gluyas Williams and George McManus . However the precise lines which characterize most of his work are firmly in place early on (e.g. the colored version of The Blue Lotus , released in 1946, is based on the original black and white newspaper version from 1934 to 1935 and not redrawn). Ligne claire was also influenced by Japan's shin-hanga style, one aspect of the Japonisme movement that swept Europe after the opening up of Japan to European influence in the 1860s.\n\nMuch of the \"Brussels school\" started to use this style, notably Edgar P. Jacobs , Bob de Moor , Roger Leloup , and Jacques Martin , many of whom also worked for Tintin magazine.\n\nThe ligne claire style achieved its highest popularity in the 1950s, but its influence started to wane in the 1960s and was seen as old-fashioned by the new generation of comic book artists. In the late 1970s, it experienced a resurgence of interest, largely due to Dutch artists like Joost Swarte and Theo van den Boogaard , who had come up through the Dutch underground comics scene, as well as the French artist Jacques Tardi . Henk Kuijpers was also successful in his application of the style.\n\nThroughout the 1980s, Yves Chaland , Ted Benoit , Serge Clerc and Floc'h relaunched the ligne claire style in France. This incarnation was a very stylistic and artistic variation, which the artists also utilized for illustrating posters and LP covers etc. Swarte dubbed this variant \"atoomstijl\" (\"atomic style\"). \n\nContemporary use of the ligne claire is often ironic or post-modern. For example, Van den Boogaard used the simple, clear style to set up a conflict with the amorality of his characters, while Tardi used it in his Adèle Blanc-Sec series to create a nostalgic atmosphere which is then ruthlessly undercut by the story. A recent serious clear line artist is the Dutchman Peter van Dongen , who created the Rampokan series about the Dutch colonisation of Indonesia .\n\nLigne claire is not confined to Franco-Belgian comics . It has also been popular with Italian artists such as Vittorio Giardino , Spanish artists such as Paco Roca and Francesc Capdevila Gisbert (\" Max \"), British artists such as Martin Handford , Bryan Talbot and Garen Ewing , Norwegian artists such as Jason , American artists such as Chris Ware , Geof Darrow , Jason Lutes , Charles Burns , Jason Little , and Italian-Australian artists such as Ilya Milstein.\n\nIn 2022, the first monograph entirely dedicated to the clear line, The Clear Line in Comics and Cinema: A Transmedial Approach , by Portuguese scholar David Pinho Barros, was published by Leuven University Press in the collection \"Studies in European Comics and Graphic Novels\".",
  "Freediving , free-diving , free diving , breath-hold diving , or skin diving , is a mode of underwater diving that relies on breath-holding until resurfacing rather than the use of breathing apparatus such as scuba gear .\n\nBesides the limits of breath-hold , immersion in water and exposure to high ambient pressure also have physiological effects that limit the depths and duration possible in freediving.\n\nExamples of freediving activities are traditional fishing techniques, competitive and non-competitive freediving, competitive and non-competitive spearfishing and freediving photography , synchronised swimming , underwater football , underwater rugby , underwater hockey , underwater target shooting and snorkeling . There are also a range of \"competitive apnea \" disciplines; in which competitors attempt to attain great depths, times, or distances on a single breath.\n\nHistorically, the term free diving was also used to refer to scuba diving , due to the freedom of movement compared with surface supplied diving . \n\nIn ancient times freediving without the aid of mechanical devices was the only possibility, with the exception of the occasional use of reeds and leather breathing bladders. The divers faced the same problems as divers today, such as blacking out during a breath hold. Freediving was practiced in ancient cultures to gather food , harvest resources such as sponge and pearl , reclaim sunken valuables , and to help aid military campaigns .\n\nIn Ancient Greece, both Plato and Homer mention the sponge as being used for bathing. The island of Kalymnos was a main centre of diving for sponges . By using weights ( skandalopetra ) of as much as 15 kilograms (33 lb) to speed the descent, breath-holding divers would descend to depths up to 30 metres (98 ft) to collect sponges. Harvesting of red coral was also done by divers. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Mediterranean had large amounts of maritime trade. As a result of shipwrecks , particularly in the fierce winter storms, divers were often hired to salvage whatever they could from the seabed. Divers would swim down to the wreck and choose the most valuable pieces to salvage.\n\nDivers were also used in warfare. Defenses against sea vessels were often created, such as underwater barricades , and hence divers were often used to scout out the seabed when ships were approaching an enemy harbor. If barricades were found, it was divers who were used to disassemble them, if possible. During the Peloponnesian War , divers were used to get past enemy blockades to relay messages as well as supplies to allies or troops that were cut off, and in 332 BC, during the Siege of Tyre , the city used divers to cut the anchor cables of Alexander 's attacking ships. \n\nIn Japan, ama divers began to collect pearls about 2,000 years ago. For thousands of years, most seawater pearls were retrieved by divers working in the Indian Ocean, in areas such as the Persian Gulf , the Red Sea , and in the Gulf of Mannar (between Sri Lanka and India ). A fragment of Isidore of Charax 's Parthian itinerary was preserved in Athenaeus 's 3rd-century Sophists at Dinner , recording freediving for pearls around an island in the Persian Gulf . \n\nPearl divers near the Philippines were also successful at harvesting large pearls, especially in the Sulu Archipelago . At times, the largest pearls belonged by law to the sultan, and selling them could result in the death penalty for the seller. Nonetheless, many pearls made it out of the archipelago by stealth, ending up in the possession of the wealthiest families in Europe. Pearling was popular in Qatar, Bahrain, Japan, and India. The Gulf of Mexico was also known for pearling. Native Americans harvested freshwater pearls from lakes and rivers like the Ohio , Tennessee , and Mississippi , while others dived for marine pearls from the Caribbean and waters along the coasts of Central and South America .\n\nIn 1940, Dottie Frazier pioneered freediving for women in the United States and also began teaching classes. It was also during this time that she began to design and sell rubber suits for Navy UDT divers. \n\nSpearfishing is an ancient method of fishing that has been used throughout the world for millennia. Early civilizations were familiar with the custom of spearing fish from rivers and streams using sharpened sticks.\n\nToday modern spearfishing makes use of elastic powered spearguns and slings, or compressed gas pneumatic powered spearguns, to strike the hunted fish. Specialised techniques and equipment have been developed for various types of aquatic environments and target fish. Spearfishing may be done using free-diving , snorkelling , or scuba diving techniques. Spearfishing while using scuba equipment is illegal in some countries. The use of mechanically powered spearguns [ clarification needed ] is also outlawed in some countries and jurisdictions. [ citation needed ] Spearfishing is highly selective, normally uses no bait and has limited by-catch .\n\nVarious cultures have collected shellfish by freediving for \"possibly thousands\" of years. One example is the historical recreational collection of abalone in South Africa, before illegal harvesting reduced stocks to levels which resulted in recreational collection being banned indefinitely. This did not completely stop illegal harvesting, because selling illegally harvested abalone remained lucrative. \n\nAquathlon (also known as underwater wrestling) is an underwater sport where two competitors wearing masks and fins wrestle underwater in an attempt to remove a ribbon from each other's ankle band in order to win the bout. The \"combat\" takes place in a 5-metre (16 ft) square ring within a swimming pool, and is made up of three 30-second rounds, with a fourth round played in the event of a tie. The sport originated during the 1980s in the former USSR (now Russia) and was first played at international level in 1993. It was recognised by the Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) in 2008. \n\nCompetitive spearfishing is defined by the world governing body CMAS as \"the hunting and capture of fish underwater without the aid of artificial breathing devices, using gear that depends entirely on the physical strength of the competitor.\" They publish a set of competition rules that are used by affiliated organisations. \n\nSynchronized swimming is a hybrid form of swimming , dance , and gymnastics , consisting of swimmers (either solos, duets, trios, combos, or teams) performing a synchronized routine of elaborate moves in the water, accompanied by music. Synchronized swimming demands advanced water skills, and requires great strength, endurance, flexibility, grace, artistry and precise timing, as well as exceptional breath control when upside down underwater. During lifts swimmers are not allowed to touch the bottom. [ citation needed ]\n\nTraditionally it was a women's sport, but following the addition of a new mixed-pair event, FINA World Aquatics competitions are open to men since the 16th 2015 championships in Kazan , and the other international and national competitions allow male competitors in every event. However, men are currently still barred from competing in the Olympics. Both USA Synchro and Synchro Canada allow men to compete with women. Most European countries also allow men to compete, and France even allows male only podiums, according to the number of participants. In the past decade, more men are becoming involved in the sport and a global biannual competition called Men's Cup has been steadily growing. [ citation needed ]\n\nSwimmers perform two routines for the judges, one technical and one free, as well as age group routines and figures. Synchronized swimming is both an individual and team sport. Swimmers compete individually during figures, and then as a team during the routine. Figures are made up of a combination of skills and positions that often require control, strength, and flexibility. Swimmers are ranked individually for this part of the competition. The routine involves teamwork and synchronization. It is choreographed to music and often has a theme. Synchronized swimming is governed internationally by FINA (Fédération Internationale de Natation).\n\nUnderwater hockey (also called octopush , mainly in the United Kingdom ) is a globally played limited- contact sport in which two teams compete to manoeuvre a hockey puck across the bottom of a swimming pool into the opposing team's goal by propelling it with a hockey stick . The sport originated in England in 1954 when Alan Blake, the founder of the newly formed Southsea Sub-Aqua Club, invented the game he called octopush to keep the club's members interested and active during the cold winter months, when open-water diving lost its appeal. Underwater hockey is now played worldwide, governed by the Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS). The first Underwater Hockey World Championship was held in Canada in 1980, after a planned championship in 1979 was scuttled by international politics and apartheid . [ citation needed ]\n\nUnderwater football is a two-team underwater sport that shares common elements with underwater hockey and underwater rugby . As with both of those games, it is played in a swimming pool with snorkeling equipment ( mask , snorkel , and fins ). The goal of the game is to manoeuvre (by carrying and passing ) a slightly negatively buoyant ball from one side of a pool to the other by players who are completely submerged underwater . Scoring is achieved by placing the ball (under control) in the gutter on the side of the pool. Variations include using a toy rubber torpedo as the ball, and weighing down buckets to rest on the bottom and serve as goals. [ citation needed ]\n\nIt is played in the Canadian provinces of Alberta , Manitoba , Newfoundland and Labrador , and Saskatchewan . \n\nUnderwater rugby is an underwater team sport. During a match, two teams try to score a negatively buoyant ball (filled with saltwater) into the opponents’ goal at the bottom of a swimming pool. It originated from within the physical fitness training regime existing in German diving clubs during the early 1960s and has little in common with rugby football except for the name. It was recognised by the Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) in 1978 and was first played as a world championship in 1980. [ citation needed ]\n\nUnderwater target shooting is an underwater sport that tests a competitors’ ability to accurately use a speargun via a set of individual and team events conducted in a swimming pool using free diving or apnea technique. The sport was developed in France during the early 1980s and is currently practised mainly in Europe . It is known as Tir sur cible subaquatique in French and as Tiro al Blanco Subacuático in Spanish.\n\nCompetitive freediving is currently governed by two world associations: AIDA International and Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS). Historically, there were two more organisations that regulated freediving records and activities — International Association of Freedivers (IAFD) and Freediving Regulations and Education Entity (FREE). Each organization has its own rules on recognizing a record attempt which can be found on the organization's website. Alongside competitive disciplines, there are record disciplines — disciplines that are not held in competitions, that are just for setting world records. There is a third organization, Guinness , which in addition to AIDA and CMAS presides over record disciplines. [ citation needed ]\n\nAlmost all types of competitive freediving are individual sports based on the best individual achievement. Exceptions to this rule are the bi-annual AIDA Team World Championship, where the combined score of the team members makes up the team's total points, and Skandalopetra diving competitions held by CMAS, the only truly ‘team’ event in freediving for which teams are formed by two athletes: one acting as the diver ( βουτηχτής , voutichtis ) and the other acting as an assistant ( κολαουζέρης , kolaouzeris ).\n\nThere are currently eleven recognized disciplines defined by AIDA and CMAS, and a dozen more that are only practiced locally. [ clarification needed ] [ citation needed ] All disciplines can be practiced by both men and women, and only CMAS currently separates records in fresh water from those at sea. The disciplines of AIDA can be done both in competition and as a record attempt, with the exception of variable weight and no limits, which are both solely for record attempts. For all AIDA depth disciplines, the depth the athlete will attempt is announced before the dive; this is accepted practice for both competition and record attempts. Most divers choose monofin (MF) over bifins (BF) where there is a choice.\n\nFollowing the deaths of two freedivers in competitions, AIDA has a system set up for monitoring and if necessary, recovering competitors who lose consciousness underwater.\nAs of 2022 the incidence of adverse events in depth competitions varies between 3 and 4%. This rate is considered relatively low and is expected during competitions where divers push their breath-hold limits. Almost all of these divers are successfully assisted and recover completely. There is a much lower incidence of more serious injuries. \n\nThe safety team is usually made up of volunteers, or paid staff in some major events, and is supervised by the Chief of Safety . Each competitor is monitored by a team of breath-hold safety divers who will descend in time to meet the competitor during their ascent, and monitor them for the rest of the ascent. They will intervene if necessary, typically by securing the competitor's airway and swimming them up to the surface. The first safety diver will meet the competitor at somewhere around 1/3 to 1/4 of the target depth, usually with a maximum of 30m. The second will meet them about 10m shallower, and a third will be on standby in case of an emergency. The work can be challenging as many dives are done in a day, so the team of safety divers is usually rotated to ensure that they are not overtasked. \n\nIn case of a deeper incident, the competitor is clipped to the downline for the duration of the dive, which can be rapidly raised by the surface support team, which includes a medical support group. \n\nThe best official result in static apnea is the Guinness WR of 11:54 by Branko Petrović in 2014, a freediver who has results over 10 minutes under both AIDA and CMAS.\nThe best no limits result is 253.2m by Herbert Nitsch in 2012; his intention of having the dive sanctioned by AIDA fell through due to a sponsoring conflict.\nAfter 2001, AIDA International no longer separated the records achieved in fresh water from those in the sea.\n\nAs of 1 January 2024 [update] , the CMAS recognized world records are: \n\nAs of 26 July 2023 [update] , the AIDA recognized world records are: \n\nThe following table only includes those disciplines that are modifications of existing AIDA or CMAS disciplines and Guinness-exclusive (as it recognizes and inherits some AIDA/CMAS records) or Guinness-conceived (CMAS and AIDA do/did sanction at some time) disciplines.\n\nAs of 25 February 2018 [update] :\n\nFreediving as a recreational activity is widely practiced and differs significantly from scuba diving . Although there are potential risks to all freediving, it can be safely practiced using a wide range of skill levels from the average snorkeler to the professional freediver. Compared to scuba diving, freediving offers: [ citation needed ]\n\nFreshwater springs, often with excellent visibility, provide good freediving opportunities but with greater risks. [ citation needed ] Diving into spring caverns with restricted access to the surface is very different from diving in open water. The time available to a freediver to solve problems underwater before hypoxia sets in is severely restricted in comparison with scuba. Freediving into confined cave systems such as Eagle's Nest Cave, Florida and Blue Springs State Park, Florida has resulted in several deaths. Cave freediving is commonly discouraged in basic freediver safety training.\n\nThe human body has several oxygen-conserving adaptations that manifest under diving conditions as part of the mammalian diving reflex . The adaptations include:\n\nIn addition to general adaptations within the human species , freediving is an example of an activity that has been directly affected by recent human evolution . The Bajau , or “Sea Nomads,” have engaged in freediving for thousands of years, and natural selection has led to larger spleen sizes. This serves as an oxygen reservoir when diving. It is hypothesized that other isolated diving populations globally may have experienced the same selection. \n\nBreath-holding ability, and hence dive performance, is a function of on-board oxygen stores, scope for metabolic rate reduction, efficient oxygen utilization, and hypoxia tolerance. Athletes attempt to accomplish this in various ways. Some divers use \"packing\", which increases lung volume beyond normal total lung capacity. In addition, training is allocated to enhance blood and muscle oxygen stores, to a limited extent. [ clarification needed ] Most divers rely on increasing fitness by increasing CO 2 tolerance and lung capacity. Simple breath-holding practice is highly effective for the build-up of tolerance to CO 2 and to some degree increased lung capacity. In an interview on the radio talk show Fresh Air , journalist James Nestor, author of the book Breath: The New Science of a Lost Art , stated: \"Some divers have a lung capacity of 14 liters, which is about double the size for a typical adult male. They weren't born this way. ... They trained themselves to breathe in ways to profoundly affect their physical bodies.\" \n\nThere is no requirement by law that free-divers are required to do formal freediving training or be certified, but due to the risks inherent to the sport, freediving without training poses a significant risk to life. The free-diving courses contain three components: theory studies, confined water sessions generally conducted in a swimming pool, and open water sessions in the ocean or other large body of fresh or salt water. \n\nTraining for freediving can take many forms, some of which can be performed on land. One training exercise is the apnea walk. This consists of a preparation \"breathe-up\", followed by a short (typically 1 minute) breath hold taken at rest. Without breaking the hold, participants then begin walking as far as possible until it becomes necessary to breathe again. Some athletes can do close to 400 meters in training this way. [ citation needed ]\n\nThis form of training is good for accustoming muscles to work under anaerobic conditions, and for tolerance to carbon dioxide build-up in the circulation. It is also easy to gauge progress, as increasing distance can be measured. [ citation needed ]\n\nBefore competition attempts, freedivers perform a preparation sequence, which usually consists of physical stretching, mental exercise and breath exercise. It may include a succession of variable length static apnea and special purging deep breaths. Results of the preparation sequence are slower metabolism, lower heart and breathing rates, lower levels of carbon dioxide in the bloodstream, and overall mental equilibrium. [ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ]\n\nThe University of Miami presents a scientific freediving class that was developed by Claire Paris , a marine scientist and freediver, the class is the first of its kind at the university. \n\nThe most obvious hazard is lack of access to air for breathing – a necessity for human life. This can result in asphyxia from drowning if the diver does not reach the surface while still capable of holding their breath and resuming breathing. The risk depends on several factors, including the depth, duration and shape of the dive profile. [ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ]\n\nLatent hypoxia is a specific hazard of deeper freedives. This effect can cause hypoxic blackout during surfacing.\n\nThere is also a wide range of environmental hazards possible specific to the site and water and weather conditions at the time of diving, and there may be other hazards specific to the freediving activity. [ clarification needed ]\n\nFailing to respond to physiological warning signals, or crossing the mental barrier by strong will, may lead to blackout underwater or on reaching the surface. Trained freedivers are well aware of this and competitions must be held under strict supervision and with competent first-aiders on standby. However, this does not eliminate the risk of blackout. Freedivers are encouraged by certification and sporting organisations to dive only with a 'buddy' who accompanies them, observing from in the water at the surface, and ready to dive to the rescue if the diver loses consciousness during the ascent. This is only reasonably practicable if the water clarity allows observation, and the buddy is capable of safely reaching the diver. [ citation needed ] Due to the nature of the sport, the risks of freediving can be reduced by strict adherence to safety measures as an integral part of the activity, but cannot be eliminated. Competition rules may require all participants to be adept in rescue and resuscitation. [ citation needed ]\n\nNicholas Mevoli , a diver from New York died on 17 November 2013 after losing consciousness on surfacing from a 3-minute 38 second dive to a depth of 72 metres (236 ft) during an official record attempt in the \"constant weight without fins\" event. He had previously reached greater depths and longer times in other disciplines. ",
  "Godzilla is a 1998 American monster film directed and co-written by Roland Emmerich . Produced by TriStar Pictures , Centropolis Entertainment , Fried Films , and Independent Pictures, and distributed by TriStar, it is a reboot of Toho Co., Ltd. 's Godzilla franchise . It is also the 23rd film in the franchise and the first Godzilla film to be completely produced by a Hollywood studio. [ a ] The film stars Matthew Broderick , Jean Reno , Maria Pitillo , Hank Azaria , Kevin Dunn , Michael Lerner , and Harry Shearer . The film is dedicated to Tomoyuki Tanaka , the co-creator and producer of various Godzilla films, who died in April 1997. In the film, authorities investigate and battle a giant monster who migrates to New York City to nest its young.\n\nIn October 1992, TriStar announced plans to produce a trilogy of Godzilla films. In May 1993, Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio were hired to write the script. In July 1994, Jan de Bont was announced as the director but left the project that December due to budget disputes. Emmerich was hired in May 1996 to direct and co-write a new script with producer Dean Devlin . Principal photography began in May 1997 and ended in September 1997.\n\nGodzilla was theatrically released on May 20, 1998, to negative reviews and grossed $379 million worldwide against a production budget between $130–150 million and marketing costs of $80 million, becoming the third highest-grossing film of 1998 . Despite turning a profit, it was considered a box office disappointment . Planned sequels were cancelled, but an animated series was produced instead. TriStar let their remake/sequel rights expire on May 20, 2003. In 2004, Toho began trademarking new iterations of TriStar's Godzilla as \" Zilla \", with only the incarnations from the 1998 film and animated series retaining the Godzilla copyright/trademark. \n\nAn iguana nest is exposed to the fallout of a military nuclear test in French Polynesia . Some time later, a Japanese cannery vessel in the South Pacific Ocean is suddenly attacked by an unknown creature, with only one fisherman surviving. While confined in a hospital in Tahiti , the traumatized survivor is visited by a mysterious Frenchman, who questions him over what he witnessed, wherein he repeatedly replies \"Gojira\" .\n\nMeanwhile, NRC scientist Dr. Niko \"Nick\" Tatopoulos is researching the effects of radiation on wildlife in the Chernobyl exclusion zone when he is interrupted by an official from the U.S. State Department who has come to pick him up for a special assignment. Nick is sent to Panama and Jamaica to study a trail of wreckage leading to another cannery ship with massive claw marks on it. Nick identifies skin samples he discovered in the shipwreck as belonging to an unknown species. He dismisses the military's theory of the creature being a living dinosaur, instead deducing that it is a mutant created by nuclear testing.\n\nThe creature travels to New York City , leaving a path of destruction. The city is evacuated before the U.S. military , on Nick's advice, lure the creature into revealing itself with a large pile of fish. However, their attempt to kill it fails and only causes further damage before it escapes. Nick collects a blood sample and, by performing a pregnancy test, discovers the creature reproduces asexually and is collecting food for its offspring. Nick also meets up with his ex-girlfriend Audrey Timmonds, a young aspiring news reporter. While she visits him, she uncovers a classified tape in his provisional military tent concerning the monster's origins and turns it over to the media. She hopes to have her report put on TV to launch her career, but her boss Charles Caiman uses the tape in his report, declaring it his discovery, and dubs the creature \" Godzilla \".\n\nAs a result of the tape's disclosure, Nick is removed from the operation, and he cuts ties with Audrey. His taxi is hijacked by the mysterious Frenchman, who identifies himself as Philippe Roaché, an agent of the French secret service . Philippe explains that he and his colleagues have been closely watching the events to cover up their country's role in the nuclear testing that created Godzilla. They suspect a nest somewhere in the city and cooperate with Nick to trace and destroy it. Meanwhile, Godzilla resurfaces and dives into the Hudson River to evade a second attempt by the military to kill it, where it is attacked by Navy submarines. After colliding with torpedoes, Godzilla sinks, believed to be dead by the authorities.\n\nNick and Philippe's team, followed by Audrey and her cameraman Victor \"Animal\" Palotti, find the nest inside Madison Square Garden . Before long, the eggs begin to hatch, and the offspring attack the strike team. Nick, Animal, Audrey, and Philippe take refuge in the Garden's broadcast booth and successfully send a live news report to alert the military. A prompt response involving an airstrike is initiated as the four escape moments before the Air Force bombs the arena.\n\nAudrey and Nick reconcile before the adult Godzilla, having survived, emerges from the Garden's ruins. Enraged by the deaths of its brood, it takes its rage out on the four, chasing them across Manhattan in a taxi. They manage to trap Godzilla within the suspension cables of the Brooklyn Bridge , allowing the returning Air Force to strike it down with missiles. Godzilla collapses to the ground where the taxi is smashed under its jaw and slowly dies from its mortal wounds, and the remaining citizens and authorities celebrate. Audrey tells Caiman that she quits working for him after what he has done, before leaving with Nick. Philippe, taking a tape Animal was recording and promising to return it after removing specific contents, thanks Nick for his help, and they part ways.\n\nMeanwhile, in the ruins of Madison Square Garden, a single surviving egg hatches, and the hatchling roars to life.\n\nAmerican film producer and distributor Henry G. Saperstein (who had co-produced and distributed past Godzilla films for the American market through his studio UPA ) received permission from Toho Co., Ltd. to pitch a new Godzilla film to Hollywood studios, stating, \"For ten years I pressured Toho to make one in America. Finally they agreed.\" Saperstein initially met with Sony Pictures producers Cary Woods and Robert N. Fried for discussions regarding a live-action Mr. Magoo film but the discussions led to the availability of the rights to Godzilla. \n\nInterested, Woods and Fried proposed the idea to Columbia Pictures , but were initially rejected. Woods stated, \"We pitched the idea to Columbia and they passed outright. Their response was they felt it had the potential for camp \". The two also tried to pitch the idea to TriStar Pictures but were also shot down, Fried stated, \"TriStar did originally pass on the project. The people who were running the studio at that particular time may not have seen commercial potential there, may not have thought that it would make a great film.\" \n\nTaking advice from his wife, Woods instead went over the executives' heads and proposed the idea to Peter Guber , the then-chairman of the board and CEO of Sony Pictures. Guber became enthusiastic about the idea, seeing Godzilla as an \"international brand\" and set the film up at TriStar. Woods recalled, \"Peter got it; he saw the movie in his head. He was like, 'Godzilla, the fire-breathing monster?! Yesss!'\" TriStar vice-chairman Ken Lemberger was sent to Tokyo to oversee the deal in obtaining the Godzilla rights from Toho in mid-1992. Sony's initial offer included a $300,000–400,000 advance payment with an annual licensing fee for the Godzilla character, as well as production bonuses, exclusive distribution and merchandising rights for Japan, a profit percentage from international ticket sales and merchandising, usage rights to some of the monsters from the first 15 Godzilla films, and allow Toho to continue producing domestic Godzilla films while TriStar developed their film. Subsequently, Toho sent Sony a document of rules on how to treat Godzilla. Robert Fried stated, \"They even sent me a four-page, single-spaced memo describing the physical requirements the Godzilla in our film had to have. They're very protective.\" \n\nIn October 1992, TriStar formally announced their acquisition of the rights to Godzilla from Toho to produce a trilogy of Godzilla films, with the promise of \"remaining true to the original series—cautioning against nuclear weapons and runaway technology.\" After TriStar's announcement, many of the original Godzilla filmmakers expressed support for the film; Haruo Nakajima (who portrayed Godzilla from 1954 to 1972) stated, \"I'm pleased. I hope that a competition will spring up between Toho and TriStar,\" Koichi Kawakita (special effects director of the Heisei Godzilla films) stated, \"I have great expectations. I'm looking forward to seeing it, not only because I direct special effects for Godzilla films but also because I am a movie fan,\" Teruyoshi Nakano (special effects director of the late Showa Godzilla films) stated, \"I'm pleased that a new approach will be taken\", and Ishirō Honda (director of various Showa Godzilla films) stated, \"It will probably be much more interesting than the ones [currently] being produced in Japan.\" \n\nIn 1994, Jan de Bont became attached to direct and began pre-production on the film for a 1996 summer release. De Bont's Godzilla would have discarded the character's atomic origin and replaced it with one wherein Godzilla is an artificial creation constructed by Atlantians to defend humanity against a shape-shifting extraterrestrial monster called \"The Gryphon\". Stan Winston and his company were employed to do the effects for the film. Winston crafted sculptures of Godzilla and The Gryphon. De Bont later left the project in December 1994 after TriStar refused to approve his budget of $100–120 million. He would later go on to direct Twister and Speed 2: Cruise Control . Clive Barker and Tim Burton were also in talks to potentially direct. \n\nIn May 1993, Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio were hired to write the screenplay. Prior to their hiring, Elliott and Rossio were searching for their next project and were offered Godzilla by their advisor Cary Woods. The duo initially declined the offer several times, Elliott recalled, \"We actually turned the project down about two or three times because we weren't sure we knew what to do with it.\" Woods eventually convinced them to discuss the project with TriStar. Elliott and Rossio wrote a three and half-page story outline that secured their employment. Rossio believes that they were offered the project due to their experience in writing \"franchise-type titles.\" Robert Fried expressed support for Elliott and Rossio, praising them as \"talented sci-fi buffs\" and stating, \"We've put a lot of time, thought and finance into the screenplay.\" Toho's character restrictions helped inspire Elliott and Rossio in finding the tone of the script, Elliott stated, \"Toho insisted we not make light of the monster. That helped us find the right tone as well as the social and political implications.\" \n\nThe duo wanted to avoid a comic-like approach and instead take the material seriously with a \"legitimate science fiction story\" that would evoke feelings of \"mystified or scared or awe-inspired\" for audiences. Rossio wanted to create a balance in anthropomorphizing Godzilla, not wanting to stray from Godzilla's humanistic personality but not humanize him entirely. The duo approached Godzilla as something that audiences would fear yet root for. Elliott found the \"key\" to the story after a friend, who was also a Godzilla fan, expressed that he found Godzilla not to be a \"good guy\", but a territorial beast, Elliott stated, \"And that, to me, meant that you could actually present Godzilla on the side of the angels but he could still be a monster.\" \n\nThe duo chose to add small details to make Godzilla seem \"more realistic\", such as the nictitating membrane . The duo took inspiration from Moby-Dick for the story concept. As the story developed, they found that the Ahab archetype would be more interesting if it were a woman who lost her husband to Godzilla. Elliott described the story to be about obsession, redemption and \"inappropriate grief response.\" The duo also wanted to deliver a story that satisfied fans by adapting Godzilla's characterization from the first few Toho films, Elliott stated, \"In one movie it does what the first three Toho films did – it takes him from being a horrendous threat to being defender of the Earth.\" Elliott and Rossio submitted their first draft on November 10, 1993. Woods and Fried were satisfied with the script, with Fried praising it for being \"respectful of the organic origins of Godzilla, in some ways a homage to US-Japanese relations.\" \n\nAfter De Bont joined the project, Elliott and Rossio revised the script based on his notes. Amongst the changes made to the first draft were the 12-year gap condensed to a year; Jill accompanies Keith to the Arctic site; Keith first notices Godzilla's teeth buried in ice instead of his claws; The alien probe crashes in Traveller, Utah instead of Kentucky. Elliott and Rossio remained on the project after De Bont left and completed their final rewrites in spring 1995. Prior to hiring a new director, TriStar hired Don Macpherson to rewrite the Elliott/Rossio script. Prior to his hiring, Macpherson was working on Possession until he received a call from his agent with an offer to work on Godzilla . Macpherson \"immediately accepted\" due to being a fan of the Toho Godzilla films. \n\nMacpherson met with Marc Platt, the then-President of TriStar, to discuss the film. The studio was concerned with the film's proposed $120 million budget, later revised to $200 million. De Bont insisted that all of the film's effects be entirely digital, Macpherson noted, \"The problem was that, in this version of the movie, it was all effects. Godzilla was in virtually every scene. So everything was an SFX scene.\" Macpherson was tasked with rewriting the script to match TriStar's \"ideal\" budget of $80 million. Prior to rewriting the script, he requested to meet with the production crew to pinpoint which scenes were deemed the most expensive. The production crew reported that the three main problems that were considered \"difficult and costly\" were Godzilla's size, Godzilla's interaction with water, and Godzilla's interaction with masonry. \n\nMacpherson was shown storyboards , concept art, and designs from De Bont's version. However, he did not keep these ideas in mind, feeling that such elements would change depending on the budget. Instead, Macpherson used the Toho Godzilla design as a reference when rewriting the script. He noted that the project had transitioned into a film that turned directors away, stating, \"they said they wanted strong, creative directors. But they wanted them as a kind of 'badge' of creative excitement and had no intention of allowing them their freedom.\" \n\nWhile Macpherson called Elliott and Rossio's original script \"terrific,\" he took issue with several of its ideas. He felt that the script discarded the \"Japanese element of post-war nuclear politics\" from the Toho films, leaving Godzilla as a threat to a single country rather than the world, Macpherson added, \"That neglected the poetic aspect of fear and wonder from the original Toho movies, and the idea of a prior 'sin' which had caused the mutation and revenge of Godzilla.\" He felt that the script lacked proper characters and \"had too many extra sequences which didn't deliver.\" He also took issue that the script never developed Godzilla as a character and treated him similar to The Terminator , though he suspected De Bont was responsible for this portrayal. \n\nMacpherson felt that the script's depiction of Godzilla was \"relentless\", noting, \"very much a Godzilla POV, so you neither identified with Godzilla nor with the scientists trying to protect the world.\" He also took issue that the first half of the script was driven by destruction and by the script's mid-point, there was \"monster fatigue\" and no \"encore,\" stating, \"So I thought the audience would be fatigued and ready for something new – and the new thing wasn't delivered.\" Macpherson attempted to resolve that issue while retaining the highlights of Elliott and Rossio's script. \n\nIn November 2018, an unofficial digital graphic novel adaptation of Elliott and Rossio's unproduced Godzilla script was released online. Entitled Godzilla '94 , the graphic novel features artwork by Todd Tennant, who worked with Rossio on the project. \n\nPrior to the release of Independence Day , director Roland Emmerich and producer Dean Devlin signed on to the project in May 1996 under the condition they would be able to handle the film their way, Devlin stated, \"I told Sony that I would do the film but on my own terms, with Godzilla as a fast-moving animal out of nature, rather than some strange kind of creature.\" Emmerich and Devlin were the first filmmakers approached by then-TriStar executive Chris Lee to do Godzilla but initially turned the offer down, Devlin stated, \"Both of us thought it was a dopey idea the first time we talked. When Chris came back to us, we still thought it was a dopey idea.\" \n\nDespite praising Elliott and Rossio's script, Emmerich discarded it, stating, \"It had some really cool things in it, but it is something I never would have done. The last half was like watching two creatures go at it. I simply don't like that.\" Emmerich instead decided to develop new ideas from scratch, stating, \"I didn't want to make the original Godzilla , I wanted nothing to do with it. I wanted to make my own. We took part of [the original movie's] basic storyline, in that the creature becomes created by radiation and it becomes a big challenge. But that's all we took. Then we asked ourselves what we would do today with a monster movie and a story like that. We forgot everything about the original Godzilla right there.\" \n\nEmmerich decided to completely reinvent Godzilla's design because he thought the original Toho design \"didn't make sense\". Emmerich also discarded the previous design approved by Jan de Bont, stating, \"I saw the creature that they designed for [TriStar's first attempt]. Jan De Bont created a Godzilla that was very close to the original, but it was not right because today we wouldn't do it like that.\" \n\nPatrick Tatopoulos was hired by Emmerich to design Godzilla. According to Tatopoulos, the only specific instructions Emmerich gave him was that it should be able to run incredibly fast. Godzilla, originally conceived as a robust, erect-standing, plantigrade reptilian sea monster, was reimagined by Tatopoulos as a lean, digitigrade bipedal iguana-like creature that stood with its back and tail parallel to the ground. Godzilla's color scheme was designed to reflect and blend in with the urban environment. At one point, it was planned to use motion capture from a human to create the movements of the computer-generated Godzilla, but it ended up looking too much like a human in a suit. \n\nTatopoulos thought the designs that Ricardo Delgado, Crash McCreery and Joey Orosco provided for Jan de Bont took the design in a wrong approach, stating, \"What they did which was a mistake in my mind was, rather than going in a new direction they tried to alter and make the old one better. And when you do that, first of all I think it's very disrespectful. It's more disrespectful for me to alter something existing than to take a fresh new direction.\" Tatopoulos took inspiration from the design of Shere Khan used in Disney's version of The Jungle Book in terms of Godzilla's chin, stating, \"One of the inspirations was a character I loved as a kid, the tiger in Jungle Book, Shere Khan. He had this great chin thing and I always loved it; he looked scary, evil but you respected him. I thought, let's try to give him a chin and I felt it still looked realistic but he had this different thing that you hadn't seen before.\" \n\nTatopoulos created four concept art pieces and a 2-foot tall maquette for a meeting with Toho. Tatopoulos and Emmerich attended the meeting to pitch their Godzilla to then Toho chairman Isao Matsuoka, Godzilla film producer Shogo Tomiyama , and Godzilla special effects director Koichi Kawakita . They unveiled Tatopoulos' artwork and maquette and the Toho trio remained silent for a few minutes, Emmerich recalled, \"They were speechless, they stared at it, and there was silence for a couple minutes, and then they said, 'Could you come back tomorrow?' I thought for sure we didn't have the movie then.\" Tomiyama later recalled that \"It was so different we realized we couldn't make small adjustments. That left the major question of whether to approve it or not.\" Even though Tomiyama was not allowed to remove the artwork and maquette from the studio premise, Tomiyama visited Godzilla producer and creator Tomoyuki Tanaka , whose failing health prevented him from attending the meeting, to explain Tatopoulos' design, stating, \"I told him, 'It's similar to Carl Lewis , with long legs, and it runs fast'.\" The following morning, Matsuoka approved the design, stating that Tatopoulos \"kept the spirit of Godzilla.\" \n\nDespite receiving approval from Toho, TriStar had yet to green-light the film. Emmerich and Devlin wrote the script on spec, with the condition that the screenplay would return to the filmmakers if the studio did not immediately approve it. Emmerich and Devlin wrote the first draft in five and a half weeks at Emmerich's vacation house in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico. Emmerich and Devlin decided to abandon the Atlantis origin established in Elliott and Rossio's script in favor of the radiation origin established in the Toho films, Devlin stated, \"In some of the early drafts of the script by others, they had Godzilla being an alien planted here. What Japan had originally come up with regarding nuclear radiation – you can't abandon that. It's too important to what Godzilla is all about.\" Emmerich and Devlin also decided to treat their Godzilla more animal-like than monstrous, Tatopoulos stated, \"We were creating an animal. We weren't creating a monster.\" Emmerich and Devlin also decided to give their Godzilla the ability to burrow underground, Devlin stated, \"We discovered that certain kinds of lizards can burrow, so we decided to give him that capability.\" Chameleon-like skin change was also considered but abandoned later during production. \n\nEmmerich and Devlin also abandoned Godzilla's iconic atomic breath in favor of a \"power breath\", where their Godzilla would simply blow objects away by exhaling a strong wind-like breath. However, news of the power breath leaked before the film's release, which outraged fans and forced Emmerich and Devlin to make last minute changes on scenes involving the power breath, effects supervisor Volker Engel stated, \"Dean and Roland wanted this monster to retain a certain menace and credibility, but Godzilla's breath is something everyone expects to see at some point, so they came up with instances in which you would see something like the old breath, but with a kind of logic applied to it. We make the assumption that something in his breath, when it comes in contact with flame, causes combustive ignition. So you get this flame-thrower effect, which causes everything to ignite.\" As a way to make their Godzilla a threat to mankind, Emmerich and Devlin also gave their Godzilla the ability to lay hundreds of eggs (via parthenogenesis) and rapidly spawn offspring that could spawn offspring of their own and quickly overrun the planet. The first draft was submitted to Sony on December 19, 1996, then-President of Sony Pictures John Calley forwarded the script to Bob Levin of marketing to brainstorm marketing ideas. \n\nTriStar green-lit the film soon after Emmerich and Devlin's completion of the first draft, bestowing complete creative freedom to write, produce, and direct on the filmmakers, while the studio managed financing, distribution and merchandising deals. The deal also enabled Emmerich and Devlin to receive 15% first-dollar gross on the film while the original producers Cary Woods and Robert Fried would be given executive producer credits. Instead of employing Digital Domain as Jan de Bont planned for his Godzilla, Emmerich and Devlin decided to use their own effects team such as Volker Engel as the film's visual effects supervisor, Joe Viskocil as miniature effects supervisor, Clay Pinney as mechanical effects supervisor, and William Fay as executive producer of the team. \n\nViewpoint DataLabs created a digital model of Godzilla, nicknamed \"Fred\", for scenes that required a digital rendition of the monster. For scenes that required practical effects, Tatopoulos' studio created a 6th-scale animatronic model of Godzilla's upper-body as well as a 24th-scale Godzilla suit donned by stuntman Kurt Carley. The filmmakers favored CG over practical effects and as a result, the final film features 400 digital shots, 185 of which feature Godzilla, and only two dozen practical effects used in the final film. \n\nPrincipal photography began on May 1, 1997 and wrapped on September 26, 1997. Filming took place in New York City and moved to Los Angeles in June. Scenes in New York were filmed in 13 days; tropical scenes were filmed in the Hawaiian Islands . The United States Marine Corps participated in the filming of the movie. An F-18 Marine Reserve pilot, Col. Dwight Schmidt, actually piloted the plane that \"fired\" the missiles that killed Godzilla. \n\nThe soundtrack, featuring alternative rock music, was released on May 19, 1998, by Epic Records . It was a success on the music charts, peaking at number 2 on the Billboard 200 and was certified platinum on June 22, 1998. The original score was composed by David Arnold . The film's score was not released on CD until 9 years later, when it went on sale as a complete original film score in 2007 by La La Land Records. The album was supported by the single \" Come with Me \" performed by Sean Combs and Jimmy Page . \n\nBob Levin, chief of marketing for the film, was caught by surprise when Emmerich insisted not to use full body images or head shots of Godzilla during the marketing, Levin stated, \"we got indications from them that they really didn't think that the full figure Godzilla should be at all exposed prior to the release of the film. While initially we reacted negatively to that, once we understood their thinking behind it, it became completely acceptable to us.\" 300 companies signed an agreement not to show the full image of Godzilla before the film's release. Prior to principal photography, Emmerich filmed a teaser trailer , budgeted at $600,000, that featured Godzilla's foot crushing the skeleton of a Tyrannosaurus Rex at a museum. The trailer was attached to screenings of Men in Black and received an overwhelmingly enthusiastic response from audiences. Afterwards, select theaters began advertising that the trailer would be featured before Men in Black . A new trailer later premiered on November 7, 1997, with the release of Starship Troopers . \n\nTaco Bell contributed to the marketing of the film with $20 million in media support. The marketing campaign featured commercials of the Taco Bell chihuahua attempting to trap the monster in a box or riding on the monster's tail and making an order for two. Trendmasters manufactured the toys for the film, including the 11-inch tall \"Living Godzilla\" and the 21-inch tall \"Ultimate Godzilla\". However, poor merchandise sales for the film led to a cancellation of a toyline based on the animated series. Robert Fried had estimated that $80 million was spent on marketing worldwide. \n\nOn November 3, 1998, the film was released on VHS and DVD in the United States. Special features for the DVD include: photo galleries, visual effects and special FX supervisor commentaries, the music video for \" Heroes \" by The Wallflowers , Behind the Scenes of Godzilla with Charles Caiman, theatrical trailers, a featurette, director/producer and cast biographies, a photo gallery, music video, and Godzilla Takes New York (before and after shots). In 1999, Sony released a Widescreen Edition VHS. The VHS earned $8.04 million from rentals during its first week in the United States, at the time making it the biggest video opening since Titanic . The DVD sold over 400,000 units in the United States by the end of 1998. It was also reported that NBC would pay around $25 million for the television broadcast rights in the United States. \n\nOn December 13, 2005, the film was released on Universal Media Disc . On March 28, 2006, Sony released a special \"monster\" edition DVD that retained the previous DVD's special features, as well as an \"All-Time Best of Godzilla Fight Scenes\" featurette, 3 episodes from Godzilla: The Series , and a \"never-before-seen\" production art gallery. On November 10, 2009, the film was released on Blu-ray , which retained the special features from the second DVD release, sans the animated series episodes. On July 16, 2013, Sony released a \"Mastered in 4K\" Blu-ray edition. On May 14, 2019, the film was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray . This release retained the same special features from the initial Blu-ray release, as well as a new Dolby Atmos audio mix. \n\nThe Wall Street Journal reported that the film would need to gross $240 million domestically in order to be considered a success. Godzilla was released in the United States and Canada on May 20, 1998, in a record 3,310 theaters. Sony expected the film to gross $100 million during the film's opening weekend, which fell on Memorial Day weekend, expecting to set a new record for the holiday. Ultimately, it would only end up earning $12.5 million on opening day and grossing $44 million during its opening weekend. The film grossed $55,726,951 over the four day holiday weekend, and $74.3 million in its first six days, falling below industry expectations. Its six-day opening gross nevertheless came close to the $74.9 million Memorial Day weekend record previously set by Mission: Impossible in 1996, but fell below the $90 million record set by The Lost World: Jurassic Park in 1997. \n\nThe film's revenue dropped by 59% in its second week of release, earning $18,020,444. For that particular weekend, the film remained in first place as the romantic drama Hope Floats overtook Deep Impact for second place with $14,210,464 in box office business. During its final week in North America, the film was in 19th place, grossing $202,157. For that weekend, Lethal Weapon 4 made its debut, opening in first place with $34,048,124 in revenue. The film went on to top out domestically at $136,314,294 in total ticket sales through an eight-week theatrical run (equivalent to $230 million adjusted for ticket inflation in 2013). \n\nInternationally, the film took in an additional $242.7 million in business, for a combined worldwide total of $379,014,294 (equivalent to $633 million adjusted for ticket inflation in 2013). For 1998 as a whole, the film was the ninth highest-grossing film domestically and the third highest-grossing film worldwide . Despite performing below expectations domestically, Godzilla was a profitable worldwide success, grossing nearly three times its budget. Sony stated that retail sales of consumer products generated $400 million; not only from the 1998 film but from the animated series and the Heisei Godzilla films that Sony acquired at the time. \n\nGodzilla received generally negative reviews from critics. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 20% based on 150 reviews, with an average rating of 4.50/10. Its critical consensus states, \"Without compelling characters or heart, Godzilla stomps on everything that made the original (or any monster movie worth its salt) a classic.\" Metacritic (which uses a weighted average) assigned Godzilla a score of 32 out of 100 based on 23 critics, indicating \"generally unfavorable\" reviews. Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film a grade \"B−\" on scale of A to F. Criticism highlighted by film critics included the film's script, acting, and directing, while fans targeted the film's reinvention of Godzilla, which included its redesign and departure from the source material. [ b ]\n\nRoger Ebert from the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film one-and-a-half stars out of four, noting that \"One must carefully repress intelligent thought while watching such a film. The movie makes no sense at all except as a careless pastiche of its betters (and, yes, the Japanese Godzilla movies are, in their way, better—if only because they embrace dreck instead of condescending to it). You have to absorb such a film, not consider it. But my brain rebelled, and insisted on applying logic where it was not welcome.\" Ebert also pointed out in his review that the characters Mayor Ebert and his assistant Gene were Devlin and Emmerich's jabs at his and Gene Siskel 's negative reviews of Stargate and Independence Day . Gene Siskel particularly singled out this aspect, writing \"why place us in the movie if you aren't going to have us be eaten or squashed by the monster?\" Siskel placed the film on his list of the worst films of 1998. [ citation needed ] James Berardinelli from ReelViews , called the film \"one of the most idiotic blockbuster movies of all time, it's like spitting into the wind. Emmerich and Devlin are master illusionists, waving their wands and mesmerizing audiences with their smoke and mirrors. It's probably too much to hope that some day, movie-goers will wake up and realize that they've been had.\" Stephen Holden of The New York Times wrote that the film \"is so clumsily structured it feels as if it's two different movies stuck together with an absurd stomping finale glued onto the end. The only question worth asking about this $120 million wad of popcorn is a commercial one. How much further will the dumbing down of the event movie have to go before the audience stops buying tickets?\" \n\nMichael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post queried, \"The question is this: Are the awe-inspiring creature effects and roaring battle scenes impressive enough to make you forget the stupid story, inaccurate science and basic implausibility?\" Thoughtfully disillusioned, he wrote, \"The cut-rate cast seems to have been plucked from the pages of TV Guide . There's Doug Savant from Melrose Place as O'Neal, a scaredy-cat military man who looks like Sgt. Rock and acts like Barney Fife . There's Maria Pitillo ( House Rules ) as Nick's soporific love interest, Audrey; The Simpsons ' Hank Azaria and Harry Shearer as a wise-cracking news cameraman and superficial reporter; Vicki Lewis of NewsRadio as a lusty scientist. Shall I continue?\" Owen Gleiberman writing for Entertainment Weekly thought \"There's no resonance to the new Godzilla , and no built-in cheese value, either. For a while, the filmmakers honor the sentimental paradox that seeped into the later Godzilla films: that this primitive destroyer, like King Kong , doesn't actually mean any harm.\" He opined that the film contained \"some clever and exciting sequences\", but ultimately came to the conclusion that, \"It says much about today's blockbuster filmmakers that they could spend so much money on Godzilla and still fail to do justice to something that was fairy-tale destructo schlock to begin with.\" \n\n\"I didn't want to do Godzilla . But they made me a deal, which was unheard of. I said, 'OK, let's go about this really radically. I'm not doing big-belly Godzilla. I'm doing him as a lizard.' That was supposed to tell everybody I can't do this movie. [Godzilla owner Toho] said, 'Oh, we'll call this the new Godzilla, the Hollywood Godzilla. Then, we can still do our fat Godzilla.' I said, 'Shit!'\"\n\nEmmerich later admitted regretting the film's production, particularly due to the rushed shooting schedule that was required for a Memorial Day weekend release and the studio's insistence on not test-screening the film. However, he defended the film as better than critics gave it credit for, as it was financially successful, and out of all the films he directed, it was the one which parents told him their children enjoyed the most. Emmerich also conceded that he never took the Toho films seriously, stating, \"I was never a big Godzilla fan, they were just the weekend matinees you saw as a kid, like Hercules films and the really bad Italian westerns . You'd go with all your friends and just laugh.\" \n\nIn later years, Devlin stated that he \"screwed up\" his Godzilla, mainly blaming the script that he co-wrote with Emmerich as the source of the film's failure. Devlin additionally emphasized \"two flaws\" that he believed hurt the film, stating, \"The first is we did not commit to anthropomorphizing Godzilla – meaning we did not decide if he was a heroic character, or a villainous character. We made the intellectual decision to have him be neither and just simply an animal trying to survive.\" Devlin said the decision was a \"big mistake\" and revealed the second flaw of the film was \"...deciding to exposit the characters' background in the middle of the film rather than in the first act (where we always do). At the time we told the audience who these characters were, they had already made their minds up about them and we could not change that perception\". Devlin concluded by stating, \"These were 2 serious mistakes in the writing of the film, and I take full responsibility.\" \n\nDuring a 2016 interview on Gilbert Gottfried 's Amazing Colossal Podcast! , Broderick maintained that he liked the film. Apart from suggesting he may have been miscast, he admitted to failing to understand the film's poor reputation, given that it made \"a lot of money\" and was the result of a large group of people's hard work. He also described Roland Emmerich as \"a very good friend.\" \n\nRob Fried, who helped acquire the rights for TriStar, was angered how the studio handled the property, stating, \"The Sony executive team that took over Godzilla was one of the worst cases of executive incompetence I have observed in my twenty-year career. One of the golden assets of our time, which was hand-delivered to them, was managed as poorly and ineptly as anybody can manage an asset. They took a jewel and turned it into dust.\" \n\nIn 2018, Azaria expressed his disappointment with working on Godzilla , citing its failure to boost his career profile as intended, and noting that he fell sick several times while shooting in rainy exteriors for five months. He went on to declare that Godzilla became the \"poster child\" for everything wrong with Hollywood in terms of budget and marketing, adding that the advertisements looked better than the film itself. \n\nVeteran Godzilla actors Haruo Nakajima and Kenpachiro Satsuma , as well as Shusuke Kaneko (who would later direct Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack ), were also critical of the film and its character. Nakajima stated \"its face looks like an iguana and its body and limbs look like a frog\". Satsuma walked out of a screening of the film at fan convention G-Con '98 in Chicago, stating, \"it's not Godzilla, it doesn't have his spirit\". Toho publicist Yosuke Ogura later called TriStar's design a \"disaster.\" TriStar's Godzilla was considered so different that the term GINO ( Godzilla In Name Only ) was coined by critic and Godzilla fan Richard Pusateri to distinguish the character apart from Toho's Godzilla. \n\nKaneko pondered on the treatment the character was given by the studio, stating, \"It is interesting [that] the US version of Godzilla runs about trying to escape missiles... Americans seem unable to accept a creature that cannot be put down by their arms.\" In 2004, Toho began trademarking future incarnations of TriStar's Godzilla as \"Zilla\" for future appearances. This decision was made by producer Shōgo Tomiyama and Godzilla: Final Wars director Ryuhei Kitamura because they felt Emmerich's film \"took the God out of Godzilla\" by portraying the character like a mere animal. The name \"Zilla\" was chosen for the character by Tomiyama as a satirical take on counterfeit Godzilla products that use \"Zilla\" as a suffix . The character has since appeared in other media as \"Zilla\". Nicholas Raymond from Screen Rant described Toho's subsequent treatment of TriStar's Godzilla as \"a clear sign that Toho doesn't regard the 1998 Godzilla as the King of the Monsters. It would appear that to them, he's just a giant lizard.\" \n\nIn 2024, filmmaker Takashi Yamazaki , director and writer of Toho's 2023 film Godzilla Minus One , spoke favorably of the 1998 film. He felt that on its own merits, the 1998 film is \"fun\" and \"quite well executed\" and was technologically a huge achievement but understood why some are hesitant to consider it part of the franchise. Yamazaki also refuted the misconception that the 1998 film was allegedly responsible for the franchise's box office decline in Japan, stating \"it had been in decline for years\" by the time that the 1998 film was released. \n\nThe film was nominated and won several awards in 1998–99. Furthermore, it was screened out of competition at the 1998 Cannes Film Festival . Godzilla would later rank in the listed bottom 20 of the Stinkers' \"100 Years, 100 Stinkers\" list, which noted the 100 worst movies of the 20th century, at #18. \n\nTriStar planned to produce a Godzilla trilogy upon acquiring the Godzilla license in 1992. Emmerich had considered using the Monster Island concept from the Toho films with the intention of creating something wild, as well as including six or seven monsters, stating, \"We'll probably come up with other monsters because we don't want to tie ourselves too much to certain things\". Prior to the 1998 film's release, Sony felt confident enough with the potential box office success that they paid Toho $5 million for sequel rights, which guaranteed them to produce a sequel within five years following the first film's release, so long as it was in active development. Devlin had confirmed plans for a trilogy, stating, \"We have a Godzilla trilogy in mind. The second one is remarkably different from the first one, and if it's embraced, a third one would make a whole lot of sense. I don't see us doing more than three, but I would love to finish out telling the story.\" \n\nEmmerich and Devlin commissioned a treatment by Tab Murphy titled Godzilla 2 . The sequel would have involved the surviving offspring battling a giant insect in Sydney . The studio abandoned sequel plans due to a lack of enthusiasm from fans, audiences, theater owners and licensees, and Emmerich and Devlin left due to budget disputes. Devlin stated, \"They wanted to tailor it budget-wise, so it didn't make sense for us creatively.\" Devlin stated that they left the film with an open-ending in case the success allowed them to return for sequels. Despite Emmerich's comments that Sony was \"absolutely ready\" to produce a sequel, he later revealed that he advised the studio to not produce a sequel, stating, \"It's so strange because people expected it to be the biggest thing ever, then it only did well. They are disappointed, and you have to defend yourself\". Sony had considered a reboot with the new series disassociating itself from the 1998 film. However, TriStar let their remake/sequel rights expire on May 20, 2003. \n\nAn animated series was produced as a sequel and aired on Fox Kids from 1998 to 2000. In the series, Dr. Tatopoulos accidentally discovers the egg that survived the aerial bombardment before it hatches, in a minor change from the ending in the 1998 film. The creature hatches after Nick Tatopoulos stumbles onto it and it assumes him to be its parent. Subsequently, Dr. Tatopoulos and his associates form a research team, investigating strange occurrences and defending mankind from dangerous mutations with the new Godzilla, which grew to full size in a few days, serving as humanity's protector from the new threats. \n\nIn 1999, Toho rebooted the Japanese series with Godzilla 2000 , launching the franchise's Millennium series. Toho originally planned to revive the series in 2005 to commemorate the franchise's 50th anniversary. However, Toho chose to revive the series early due to popular demand, producer Shogo Tomiyama stated, \"The shape of the American version of Godzilla was so different from the Japanese version that there was a clamor among fans and company officials to create a Godzilla unique to Japan.\" \n\nIn 2014, Legendary Pictures and Warner Bros. Pictures released their own Hollywood reboot of the same name . Producer Thomas Tull was adamant about keeping their Godzilla design consistent with the Toho version and expressed puzzlement as to why the crew behind TriStar's Godzilla drastically changed the design to the point that it was \"unrecognizable.\" The film generated its own sequels, Godzilla: King of the Monsters , Godzilla vs. Kong and Godzilla x Kong: The New Empire , creating a cinematic universe media franchise titled the MonsterVerse . ",
  "The Internet Archive is an American non-profit organization founded in 1996 by Brewster Kahle that runs a digital library website, archive.org. It provides free access to collections of digitized media including websites , software applications , music , audiovisual , and print materials. The Archive also advocates a free and open Internet . Its mission is committing to provide \"universal access to all knowledge\". \n\nThe Internet Archive allows the public to upload and download digital material to its data cluster, but the bulk of its data is collected automatically by its web crawlers , which work to preserve as much of the public web as possible. Its web archive , the Wayback Machine , contains hundreds of billions of web captures. The Archive also oversees numerous book digitization projects , collectively one of the world's largest book digitization efforts.\n\nBrewster Kahle founded the Archive in May 1996, around the same time that he began the for-profit web crawling company Alexa Internet . The earliest known archived page on the site was saved on May 10, 1996, at 2:42 pm UTC (7:42 am PDT ). [ better source needed ] By October of that year, the Internet Archive had begun to archive and preserve the World Wide Web in large amounts. The archived content became more easily available to the general public in 2001, through the Wayback Machine .\n\nIn late 1999, the Archive expanded its collections beyond the web archive, beginning with the Prelinger Archives . Now, the Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software . It hosts a number of other projects: the NASA Images Archive, the contract crawling service Archive-It, and the wiki-editable library catalog and book information site Open Library . Soon after that, the Archive began working to provide specialized services relating to the information access needs of the print-disabled; publicly accessible books were made available in a protected Digital Accessible Information System (DAISY) format. \n\nAccording to its website: \n\nMost societies place importance on preserving artifacts of their culture and heritage. Without such artifacts, civilization has no memory and no mechanism to learn from its successes and failures. Our culture now produces more and more artifacts in digital form. The Archive's mission is to help preserve those artifacts and create an Internet library for researchers, historians, and scholars.\n\nIn August 2012, the Archive announced that it had added BitTorrent to its file download options for more than 1.3 million existing files, and all newly uploaded files. This method is the fastest means of downloading media from the Archive, as files are served from two Archive data centers, in addition to other torrent clients which have downloaded and continue to serve the files. \n\nOn November 6, 2013, the Internet Archive's headquarters in San Francisco's Richmond District caught fire, destroying equipment and damaging some nearby apartments. According to the Archive, it lost a side-building housing one of 30 of its scanning centers; cameras, lights, and scanning equipment worth hundreds of thousands of dollars; and \"maybe 20 boxes of books and film, some irreplaceable, most already digitized, and some replaceable\". The nonprofit Archive sought donations to cover the estimated $600,000 in damage. \n\nAn overhaul of the site was launched as beta in November 2014, and the legacy layout was removed in March 2016. \n\nIn November 2016, Kahle announced that the Internet Archive was building the Internet Archive of Canada, a copy of the Archive to be based somewhere in Canada . The announcement received widespread coverage due to the implication that the decision to build a backup archive in a foreign country was because of the upcoming presidency of Donald Trump . \n\nBeginning in 2017, OCLC and the Internet Archive have collaborated to make the Archive's records of digitized books available in WorldCat . \n\nSince 2018, the Internet Archive visual arts residency, which is organized by Amir Saber Esfahani and Andrew McClintock, helps connect artists with the Archive's over 48 petabytes of digitized materials. Over the course of the yearlong residency, visual artists create a body of work which culminates in an exhibition. The hope is to connect digital history with the arts and create something for future generations to appreciate online or off. Previous artists in residence include Taravat Talepasand , Whitney Lynn , and Jenny Odell . \n\nThe Internet Archive acquires most materials from donations, such as hundreds of thousands of 78 rpm discs from Boston Public Library in 2017, a donation of 250,000 books from Trent University in 2018, and the entire collection of Marygrove College 's library after it closed in 2020. All material is then digitized and retained in digital storage, while a digital copy is returned to the original holder and the Internet Archive's copy, if not in the public domain, is lent to patrons worldwide one at a time under the controlled digital lending (CDL) theory of the first-sale doctrine . \n\nOn June 1, 2020, four large publishing houses – Hachette Book Group , Penguin Random House , HarperCollins , and John Wiley – filed a lawsuit against the Internet Archive before the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York , claiming that the Internet Archive's practice of controlled digital lending constituted copyright infringement . On March 25, 2023, the court found in favor of the publishers. The negotiated judgment of August 11, 2023, barred the Internet Archive from digitally lending books for which electronic copies are on sale.\n\nAlso on August 11, 2023, the music industry giants Universal Music Group , Sony Music and Concord (together with their respective labels Capitol Records , Arista Records and CMGI Recorded Music Assets) sued the Internet Archive before the same United States District Court for the Southern District of New York over the Internet Archive's Great 78 Project for $621 million in damages from alleged copyright infringement. \n\nIn September 2024, Google and the Internet Archive announced a collaboration where links to the wayback machine would be included in the 'more about this page' menu in Google Search . This collaboration effectively replaced Google's own Google Cache service that it had retired earlier that year. In September 2024, Google and the Internet Archive announced a collaboration providing links to the Wayback Machine from within Google Search . \n\nDuring the week of May 27, 2024, the Internet Archive suffered a series of distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks that made its services unavailable intermittently, sometimes for hours at a time, over a period of several days. The attack was claimed on May 28 by a hacker group called SN_BLACKMETA, with possible links to Anonymous Sudan . The incident drew a comparison with the 2023 British Library cyberattack , which affected the UK Web Archive . \n\nBeginning October 9, 2024, the Internet Archive's team, including archivist Jason Scott and security researcher Scott Helme, confirmed DDoS attacks, site defacement, and a data breach. The purported hacktivist group SN_BLACKMETA again claimed responsibility. A pop-up on the defaced site claimed that there was a \"catastrophic\" security breach , stating \"Have you ever felt like the Internet Archive runs on sticks and is constantly on the verge of suffering a catastrophic security breach? It just happened. See 31 million of you on HIBP !\" It was reported that about 31 million user accounts were affected, and compromised in a file called \"ia_users.sql\", dated September 28, 2024. The attackers stole users' email addresses and Bcrypt -hashed passwords. As of October 15, 2024, the website was still mostly offline for \"prioritizing keeping data safe at the expense of service availability.\" On October 11, Kahle said that the data is safe, and will bring the service back to normal \"in days, not weeks.\" On October 13, the Wayback Machine was restored in a read-only format, while archiving web pages was temporarily disabled. On October 14, Brewster Kahle said \"[the Wayback Machine] volume is back to normal: 1,500 requests per second\". On October 20, threat actors stole unrotated API tokens and breached Internet Archive on its Zendesk email support platform; they also claimed responsibility for the other breaches yet stated that SN_BLACKMETA was behind just the DDoS attacks. On October 21, Internet Archive went back online in a read-only manner. On October 22, all Internet Archive services temporarily went offline, but later that same day, only the Wayback Machine, Archive-It, and blog.archive.org were resumed. [ citation needed ] On October 23, archive.org, the Wayback Machine, Archive-It, and the Open Library services all resumed but with some features, such as logging in, still unavailable until the staff announced it back available in the next day or two. On October 25, the login feature was made available and the site has remained active since. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Archive is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit operating in the United States. In 2019, it had an annual budget of $37 million, derived from revenue from its Web crawling services, various partnerships, grants, donations, and the Kahle-Austin Foundation . The Internet Archive also manages periodic funding campaigns. For instance, a December 2019 campaign had a goal of reaching $6 million in donations. It uses Ubuntu as its choice of operating system for the website servers. \n\nThe Archive is headquartered in San Francisco , California. From 1996 to 2009, its headquarters were in the Presidio of San Francisco , a former U.S. military base. Since 2009, its headquarters have been at 300 Funston Avenue in San Francisco, a former Christian Science Church . At one time, most of its staff worked in its book-scanning centers; as of 2019, scanning is performed by 100 paid operators worldwide. The Archive also has data centers in three Californian cities: San Francisco, Redwood City , and Richmond . To reduce the risk of data loss, the Archive creates copies of parts of its collection at more distant locations, including the Bibliotheca Alexandrina in Egypt and a facility in Amsterdam . \n\nSince 2016, Internet Archive started to work to create a decentralized prototype of the digital library. From 2020, content from Internet Archive started to be stored in Filecoin . By October 2023, one petabyte of data had been uploaded to the Filecoin network. \n\nThe Archive is a member of the International Internet Preservation Consortium and was officially designated as a library by the state of California in 2007. \n\nThe Wayback Machine is a service that allows archives of the World Wide Web to be searched and accessed. It can be used to see what previous versions of web sites used to look like or to visit web sites that no longer even exist. The Wayback Machine was created as a joint effort between Alexa Internet (owned by Amazon.com ) and the Internet Archive. Hundreds of billions of web sites and their associated data (images, source code, documents, etc.) are saved in a database. As of September 5, 2024 [update] , the Internet Archive held over 866 billion web pages, more than 42.5 million print materials, 13 million videos, 3 million TV news reports, 1.2 million software programs, 14 million audio files, 5 million images, and 272,660 concerts in its Wayback Machine. \n\nCreated in early 2006, Archive-It is a web archiving subscription service that allows institutions and individuals to build and preserve collections of digital content and create digital archives. Archive-It allows the user to customize their capture or exclusion of web content they want to preserve for cultural heritage reasons. Through a web application, Archive-It partners can harvest, catalog, manage, browse, search, and view their archived collections. \n\nIn terms of accessibility, the archived web sites are full text searchable within seven days of capture. Content collected through Archive-It is captured and stored as a WARC file . A primary and back-up copy is stored at the Internet Archive data centers. A copy of the WARC file can be given to subscribing partner institutions for geo-redundant preservation and storage purposes to their best practice standards. Periodically, the data captured through Archive-It is indexed into the Internet Archive's general archive.\n\nAs of March 2014 [update] , Archive-It had more than 275 partner institutions in 46 U.S. states and 16 countries that have captured more than 7.4 billion URLs for more than 2,444 public collections. [ citation needed ] Archive-It partners are universities and college libraries, state archives, federal institutions, museums, law libraries, and cultural organizations, including the Electronic Literature Organization , North Carolina State Archives and Library, Stanford University , Columbia University , American University in Cairo , Georgetown Law Library, and many others. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn September 2020, Internet Archive announced a new initiative to archive and preserve open access academic journals, called Internet Archive Scholar . Its full-text search index includes over 25 million research articles and other scholarly documents preserved in the Internet Archive. The collection spans from digitized copies of eighteenth century journals through the latest open access conference proceedings and pre-prints crawled from the World Wide Web. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 2021, the Internet Archive announced the initial version of the General Index , a publicly available index to a collection of 107 million academic journal articles . \n\nThe Archive stores files inside so-called items, which are similar to directories in that they can contain multiple files, but can have additional metadata such as a description and tags which make them more searchable.\n\nSome file types can be previewed directly on the site, where as others have to be downloaded in order to be opened. If multiple multimedia files exist in an item, the website generates a playlist for video or audio files, or a slide show for pictures. If an item contains at least one video or picture, the Archive generates a preview thumbnail that can be seen on collection pages and in searches. Items can contain mixed data such as music files with an album cover picture, in which case the picture is used as thumbnail. \n\nStaff members of the Internet Archive organize items by placing them into so-called collections, which are pages listing multiple items. \n\nThe scanning performed by the Internet Archive is financially supported by libraries and foundations. As of November 2008 [update] , when there were approximately 1 million texts, the entire collection was greater than 500 terabytes, which included raw camera images, cropped and skewed images, PDFs , and raw OCR data. \n\nAs of July 2013 [update] , the Internet Archive was operating 33 scanning centers in five countries, digitizing about 1,000 books a day for a total of more than 2 million books, in a total collection of 4.4 million books – including material digitized by others and fed into the Internet Archive; at that time, users were performing more than 15 million downloads per month. \n\nThe material digitized by others includes more than 300,000 books that were contributed to the collection, between about 2006 and 2008, by Microsoft through its Live Search Books project, which also included financial support and scanning equipment directly donated to the Internet Archive. On May 23, 2008, Microsoft announced it would be ending its Live Book Search project and would no longer be scanning books, donating its remaining scanning equipment to its former partners. \n\nAround October 2007, Archive users began uploading public domain books from Google Book Search . As of November 2013 [update] , there were more than 900,000 Google-digitized books in the Archive's collection; the books are identical to the copies found on Google, except without the Google watermarks, and are available for unrestricted use and download. [ a ] Brewster Kahle revealed in 2013 that this archival effort was coordinated by Aaron Swartz , who, with a \"bunch of friends\", downloaded the public domain books from Google slowly enough and from enough computers to stay within Google's restrictions. They did this to ensure public access to the public domain . The Archive ensured the items were attributed and linked back to Google, which never complained, while libraries \"grumbled\". According to Kahle, this is an example of Swartz's \"genius\" to work on what could give the most to the public good for millions of people. \n\nIn addition to books, the Archive offers free and anonymous public access to more than four million court opinions, legal briefs, or exhibits uploaded from the United States Federal Courts ' PACER electronic document system via the RECAP web browser plugin. These documents had been kept behind a federal court paywall. On the Archive, they had been accessed by more than six million people by 2013. \n\nThe Archive's BookReader web app , built into its website, has features such as single-page, two-page, and thumbnail modes; fullscreen mode; page zooming of high-resolution images; and flip page animation. \n\nIn October 2024, the Internet Archive agreed to accept the paper copies of 400,000 uncatalogued dissertations from the Leiden University Library , from the period 1851-2004, that the library wanted to dispose of. The University had received them from foreign Universities as part of a dissertation exchange program that had begun with its foundation in 1575, continuing for nearly 430 years. The Archive plans to digitise them and make them accessible online. The original full collection included theses by Niels Bohr , Marie Curie , Émile Durkheim , Albert Einstein , Otto Hahn , Carl Jung , J. Robert Oppenheimer , Max Planck , Luigi Pirandello , Gustav Stresemann and Max Weber . \n\nThe Open Library is another project of the Internet Archive. The project seeks to include a web page for every book ever published: it holds 25 million catalog records of editions. It also seeks to be a web-accessible public library: it contains the full texts of approximately 1,600,000 public domain books (out of the more than five million from the main texts collection ), as well as in-print and in-copyright books, many of which are fully readable, downloadable and full-text searchable ; it offers a two-week loan of e-books in its controlled digital lending program for over 647,784 books not in the public domain, in partnership with over 1,000 library partners from six countries after a free registration on the web site. Open Library is a free and open-source software project, with its source code freely available on GitHub .\n\nThe Open Library faces objections from some authors and the Society of Authors , who hold that the project is distributing books without authorization and is thus in violation of copyright laws, and four major publishers initiated a copyright infringement lawsuit against the Internet Archive in June 2020 to stop the Open Library project. \n\nMany large institutional sponsors have helped the Internet Archive provide millions of scanned publications (text items). Some sponsors that have digitized large quantities of texts include the University of Toronto's Robarts Library , University of Alberta Libraries , University of Ottawa , Library of Congress , Boston Library Consortium member libraries, Boston Public Library , Princeton Theological Seminary Library , and many others. \n\nIn 2017, the MIT Press authorized the Internet Archive to digitize and lend books from the press's backlist , with financial support from the Arcadia Fund . A year later, the Internet Archive received further funding from the Arcadia Fund to invite some other university presses to partner with the Internet Archive to digitize books, a project called \"Unlocking University Press Books\". \n\nThe Library of Congress created numerous Handle System identifiers that pointed to free digitized books in the Internet Archive. The Internet Archive and Open Library are listed on the Library of Congress website as a source of e-books. \n\nIn addition to web archives, the Internet Archive maintains extensive collections of digital media that are attested by the uploader to be in the public domain in the United States or licensed under a license that allows redistribution, such as Creative Commons licenses. [ citation needed ] Media are organized into collections by media type (moving images, audio, text, etc.), and into sub-collections by various criteria. Each of the main collections includes a \"Community\" sub-collection (formerly named \"Open Source\") where general contributions by the public are stored. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Audio Archive includes music, audiobooks , news broadcasts, old time radio shows, podcasts , and a wide variety of other audio files. As of January 2023 [update] , there are more than 15,000,000 free digital recordings in the collection. The subcollections include audio books and poetry, podcasts, non-English audio, and many others. The sound collections are curated by B. George , director of the ARChive of Contemporary Music . \n\nA project to preserve recordings of amateur radio transmissions, with funding from the Amateur Radio Digital Communications foundation. \n\nThe Live Music Archive sub-collection includes more than 170,000 concert recordings from independent musicians, as well as more established artists and musical ensembles with permissive rules about recording their concerts, such as the Grateful Dead , and more recently, The Smashing Pumpkins . Also, Jordan Zevon has allowed the Internet Archive to host a definitive collection of his father Warren Zevon 's concert recordings. The Zevon collection ranges from 1976 to 2001 and contains 126 concerts including 1,137 songs. \n\nThe Great 78 Project aims to digitize 250,000 78 rpm singles (500,000 songs) from the period between 1880 and 1960, donated by various collectors and institutions. It has been developed in collaboration with the Archive of Contemporary Music and George Blood Audio, responsible for the audio digitization. \n\nThe Archive has a collection of freely distributable music that is streamed and available for download via its Netlabels service. The music in this collection generally has Creative Commons-license catalogs of virtual record labels. \n\nThis collection contains more than 3.5 million items. Cover Art Archive , Metropolitan Museum of Art – Gallery Images, NASA Images, Occupy Wall Street Flickr Archive, and USGS Maps are some sub-collections of Image collection. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Cover Art Archive is a joint project between the Internet Archive and MusicBrainz , whose goal is to make cover art images on the Internet. As of April 2021, [update] this collection contains more than 1,400,000 items. \n\nThe images of this collection are from the Metropolitan Museum of Art . This collection contains more than 140,000 items. \n\nThe NASA Images archive was created through a Space Act Agreement between the Internet Archive and NASA to bring public access to NASA's image, video, and audio collections in a single, searchable resource. The Internet Archive NASA Images team worked closely with all of the NASA centers to keep adding to the ever-growing collection. The nasaimages.org site launched in July 2008 and had more than 100,000 items online at the end of its hosting in 2012.\n\nThis collection contains Creative Commons -licensed photographs from Flickr related to the Occupy Wall Street movement. This collection contains more than 15,000 items. \n\nThis collection contains more than 59,000 items from Libre Map Project . \n\nOne of the sub-collections of the Internet Archive's Video Archive is the Machinima Archive. This small section hosts many Machinima videos. Machinima is a digital artform in which computer games , game engines , or software engines are used in a sandbox-like mode to create motion pictures, recreate plays, or even publish presentations or keynotes. The archive collects a range of Machinima films from internet publishers such as Rooster Teeth and Machinima.com as well as independent producers. The sub-collection is a collaborative effort among the Internet Archive, the How They Got Game research project at Stanford University, the Academy of Machinima Arts and Sciences, and Machinima.com. \n\nThis collection contains approximately 160,000 microfilmed items from a variety of libraries including the University of Chicago Libraries , University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , University of Alberta , Allen County Public Library , and National Technical Information Service . \n\nThe Internet Archive holds a collection of approximately 3,863 feature films. Additionally, the Internet Archive's Moving Image collection includes: newsreels , classic cartoons , pro- and anti-war propaganda , The Video Cellar Collection, Skip Elsheimer's \"A.V. Geeks\" collection, early television, and ephemeral material from Prelinger Archives , such as advertising , educational, and industrial films, as well as amateur and home movie collections. [ citation needed ]\n\nSubcategories of this collection include:\n\nOpen Educational Resources is a digital collection at archive.org. This collection contains hundreds of free courses, video lectures, and supplemental materials from universities in the United States and China . The contributors of this collection are ArsDigita University , Hewlett Foundation , MIT , Monterey Institute , and Naropa University . \n\nIn September 2012, the Internet Archive launched the TV News Search & Borrow service for searching U.S. national news programs. The service is built on closed captioning transcripts and allows users to search and stream 30-second video clips. Upon launch, the service contained \"350,000 news programs collected over 3 years from national U.S. networks and stations in San Francisco and Washington D.C.\" According to Kahle, the service was inspired by the Vanderbilt Television News Archive , a similar library of televised network news programs. In contrast to Vanderbilt, which limits access to streaming video to individuals associated with subscribing colleges and universities, the TV News Search & Borrow allows open access to its streaming video clips. In 2013, the Archive received an additional donation of \"approximately 40,000 well-organized tapes\" from the estate of a Philadelphia woman, Marion Stokes . Stokes \"had recorded more than 35 years of TV news in Philadelphia and Boston with her VHS and Betamax machines.\" \n\nBrooklyn Museum collection contains approximately 3,000 items from Brooklyn Museum . In December 2020, the film research library of Lillian Michelson was donated to the archive. \n\nVoicing a strong reaction to the idea of books simply being thrown away, and inspired by the Svalbard Global Seed Vault , Kahle now envisions collecting one copy of every book ever published. \"We're not going to get there, but that's our goal\", he said. Alongside the books, Kahle plans to store the Internet Archive's old servers, which were replaced in 2010. \n\nThe Internet Archive has \"the largest collection of historical software online in the world\", spanning 50 years of computer history in terabytes of computer magazines and journals, books, shareware discs, FTP sites, video games , etc. The Internet Archive has created an archive of what it describes as \"vintage software\", as a way to preserve them. The project advocated an exemption from the United States Digital Millennium Copyright Act to permit them to bypass copy protection , which the United States Copyright Office approved in 2003 for a period of three years. The Archive does not offer the software for download, as the exemption is solely \"for the purpose of preservation or archival reproduction of published digital works by a library or archive.\" The Library of Congress renewed the exemption in 2006, and in 2009 indefinitely extended it pending further rulemakings. The Library reiterated the exemption as a \"Final Rule\" with no expiration date in 2010. In 2013, the Internet Archive began to provide select video games browser -playable via MESS , for instance the Atari 2600 game E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial . Since December 23, 2014, the Internet Archive presents, via a browser-based DOSBox emulation, thousands of DOS /PC games for \"scholarship and research purposes only\". In November 2020, the Archive introduced a new emulator for Adobe Flash called Ruffle , and began archiving Flash animations and games ahead of the December 31, 2020, end-of-life for the Flash plugin across all computer systems. \n\nA combined hardware software system has been developed that performs a safe method of digitizing content. \n\nFrom 2012 to November 2015, the Internet Archive operated the Internet Archive Federal Credit Union, a federal credit union based in New Brunswick, New Jersey , with the goal of providing access to low- and middle-income people. Throughout its short existence, the IAFCU experienced significant conflicts with the National Credit Union Administration , which severely limited the IAFCU's loan portfolio and concerns over serving Bitcoin firms. At the time of its dissolution, it consisted of 395 members and was worth $2.5 million. \n\nSince 2019, the Internet Archive organizes an event called Decentralized Web Camp (DWeb Camp). It is an annual camp that brings together a diverse global community of contributors in a natural setting. The camp aims to tackle real-world challenges facing the web and co-create decentralized technologies for a better internet. It aims to foster collaboration, learning, and fun while promoting principles of trust, human agency, mutual respect, and ecological awareness. \n\nOn September 30, 2021, as a part of its 25th anniversary celebration, Internet Archive launched the \"Wayforward Machine\", a satirical , fictional website covered with pop-ups asking for personal information. The site was intended to depict a fictional dystopian timeline of real-world events leading to such a future, such as the repeal of Section 230 of the United States Code in 2022 and the introduction of advertising implants in 2041. \n\nThe Great Room of the Internet Archive features a collection of more than 100 ceramic figures representing employees of the Internet Archive, with the 100th statue immortalizing Aaron Swartz . This collection, inspired by the statues of the Xian warriors in China , was commissioned by Brewster Kahle, sculpted by Nuala Creed , and as of 2014, is ongoing. \n\nThe Internet Archive visual arts residency, organized by Amir Saber Esfahani, is designed to connect emerging and mid-career artists with the Archive's millions of collections and to show what is possible when open access to information intersects with the arts. During this one-year residency, selected artists develop a body of work that responds to and utilizes the Archive's collections in their own practice. \n\nOn May 8, 2008, it was revealed that the Internet Archive had successfully challenged an FBI national security letter asking for logs on an undisclosed user. \n\nOn November 28, 2016, it was revealed that a second FBI national security letter had been successfully challenged that had been asking for logs on another undisclosed user. \n\nThe Internet Archive blacked out its web site for 12 hours on January 18, 2012, in protest of the Stop Online Piracy Act and the PROTECT IP Act bills , two pieces of legislation in the United States Congress that they argued would \"negatively affect the ecosystem of web publishing that led to the emergence of the Internet Archive\". This occurred in conjunction with the English Wikipedia blackout , as well as numerous other protests across the Internet. \n\nThe Internet Archive is a member of the Open Book Alliance , which has been among the most outspoken critics of the Google Book Settlement . The Archive advocates an alternative digital library project. \n\nOn October 9, 2016, the Internet Archive was temporarily blocked in Turkey after it was used (amongst other file hosting services) by hackers to host 17 GB of leaked government emails. \n\nBecause the Internet Archive only lightly moderates uploads, it includes resources that may be valued by extremists and the site may be used by them to evade block listing . In February 2018, the Counter Extremism Project said that the Archive hosted terrorist videos, including the beheading of Alan Henning , and had declined to respond to requests about the videos. In May 2018, a report published by the cyber-security firm Flashpoint stated that the Islamic State was using the Internet Archive to share its propaganda. Chris Butler, from the Internet Archive, responded that they regularly spoke to the US and EU governments about sharing information on terrorism. In April 2019, Europol , acting on a referral from French police, asked the Internet Archive to remove 550 sites of \"terrorist propaganda\". The Archive rejected the request, saying that the reports were wrong about the content they pointed to, or were too broad for the organization to comply with. On July 14, 2021, the Internet Archive held a joint \"Referral Action Day\" with Europol to target terrorist videos. \n\nA 2021 article said that jihadists regularly used the Internet Archive for \" dead drops \" of terrorist videos. In January 2022, a former UCLA lecturer's 800-page manifesto, containing racist ideas and threats against UCLA staff, was uploaded to the Internet Archive. The manifesto was removed by the Internet Archive after a week, amidst discussion about whether such documents should be preserved by archivists or not. Another 2022 paper found \"an alarming volume of terrorist, extremist, and racist material on the Internet Archive\". A 2023 paper reported that Neo-Nazis collect links to online, publicly available resources to be shared with new recruits. As the Internet Archive hosts uploaded texts that are not allowed on other websites, Nazi and neo-Nazi books in the Archive (e.g., The Turner Diaries ) frequently appear on these lists. These lists also feature older, public domain material created when white supremacist views were more mainstream. \n\nIn the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic which closed many schools, universities, and libraries, the Archive announced on March 24, 2020, that it was creating the National Emergency Library by removing the lending restrictions it had in place for 1.4 million digitized books in its Open Library but otherwise limiting users to the number of books they could check out and enforcing their return; normally, the site would only allow one digital lending for each physical copy of the book they had, by use of an encrypted file that would become unusable after the lending period was completed. This Library would remain as such until at least June 30, 2020, or until the US national emergency was over, whichever came later. At launch, the Internet Archive allowed authors and rightholders to submit opt-out requests for their works to be omitted from the National Emergency Library. \n\nThe Internet Archive said the National Emergency Library addressed an \"unprecedented global and immediate need for access to reading and research material\" due to the closures of physical libraries worldwide. They justified the move in a number of ways. Legally, they said they were promoting access to those inaccessible resources, which they claimed was an exercise in fair use principles. The Archive continued implementing their controlled digital lending policy that predated the National Emergency Library, meaning they still encrypted the lent copies and it was no easier for users to create new copies of the books than before. An ultimate determination of whether or not the National Emergency Library constituted fair use could only be made by a court. Morally, they also pointed out that the Internet Archive was a registered library like any other, that they either paid for the books themselves or received them as donations, and that lending through libraries predated copyright restrictions. \n\nThe Archive had already been criticized by authors and publishers for its prior lending approach, and upon announcement of the National Emergency Library, authors, publishers, and groups representing both took further issue with The Archive and its Open Library project, equating the move to copyright infringement and digital piracy, and using the COVID-19 pandemic as a reason to push the boundaries of copyright. After the works of some of these authors were ridiculed in responses, the Internet Archive's Jason Scott requested that supporters of the National Emergency Library not denigrate anyone's books: \"I realize there's strong debate and disagreement here, but books are life-giving and life-changing and these writers made them.\" \n\nIn November 2005, free downloads of Grateful Dead concerts were removed from the site, following what seemed to be disagreements between some of the former band members. John Perry Barlow identified Bob Weir , Mickey Hart , and Bill Kreutzmann as the instigators of the change, according to an article in The New York Times . Phil Lesh , a founding member of the band, commented on the change in a November 30, 2005, posting to his personal web site:\n\nIt was brought to my attention that all of the Grateful Dead shows were taken down from Archive.org right before Thanksgiving . I was not part of this decision making process and was not notified that the shows were to be pulled. I do feel that the music is the Grateful Dead's legacy and I hope that one way or another all of it is available for those who want it. \n\nA November 30 forum post from Brewster Kahle summarized what appeared to be the compromise reached among the band members. Audience recordings could be downloaded or streamed, but soundboard recordings were to be available for streaming only. Concerts have since been re-added. \n\nIn February 2016, Internet Archive users had begun archiving digital copies of Nintendo Power , Nintendo 's official magazine for their games and products, which ran from 1988 to 2012. The first 140 issues had been collected, before Nintendo had the archive removed on August 8, 2016. In response to the take-down, Nintendo told gaming website Polygon , \"[Nintendo] must protect our own characters, trademarks and other content. The unapproved use of Nintendo's intellectual property can weaken our ability to protect and preserve it, or to possibly use it for new projects\". \n\nIn August 2017, the Department of Telecommunications of the Government of India blocked the Internet Archive along with other file-sharing websites, in accordance with two court orders issued by the Madras High Court , citing piracy concerns after copies of two Bollywood films were allegedly shared via the service. The HTTP version of the Archive was blocked but it remained accessible using the HTTPS protocol. \n\nIn 2023, the Internet Archive became a popular site for Indians to watch the first episode of India: The Modi Question , a BBC documentary released on January 17 and banned in India by January 20. The video was reported to have been removed by the Archive on January 23. The Internet Archive then stated, on January 27, that they had removed the video in response to a BBC request under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act . \n\nThe operation of the National Emergency Library was part of a lawsuit filed against the Internet Archive by four major book publishers—Hachette, HarperCollins, John Wiley & Sons, and Penguin Random House—in June 2020, challenging the copyright validity of the controlled digital lending program. In response, the Internet Archive closed the National Emergency Library on June 16, 2020, rather than the planned June 30, 2020, due to the lawsuit. The plaintiffs, supported by the Copyright Alliance , claimed in their lawsuit that the Internet Archive's actions constituted a \"willful mass copyright infringement.\" \n\nJudge Koeltl ruled on March 24, 2023, against Internet Archive in the case, saying the National Emergency Library concept was not fair use, so the Archive infringed their copyrights by lending out the books without the waitlist restriction. An agreement was then reached for the Internet Archive to pay an undisclosed amount to the publishers. The Internet Archive appealed the ruling. On September 4, 2024, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit upheld the district court's ruling, calling the Internet Archive's argument that they were shielded by fair use doctrine \"unpersuasive\". \n\nIn August 2023, the music industry corporations Universal Music Group (UMG), Sony Music and Concord sued the Internet Archive over its Great 78 Project, asserting the project was engaged in copyright infringement. The Great 78 Project stores digitized versions of pre-1972 songs and albums from 78 rpm phonograph records , for \"the preservation, research and discovery of 78rpm records.\" The project had started in 2016, when pre-1972 recordings had not been protected by copyright; in 2018, the U.S. Congress passed the Music Modernization Act (MMA) which enabled legal remedies for unauthorised use of pre-1972 recordings until 2067, thus effectively covering them with copyright. \n\nUMG and Sony had been the two largest companies in this sector for more than a decade, with respective market shares of 31.8% and 22.1% in 2023. Concord was a rapidly expanding music business closely partnered with UMG since its transformation into Concord Music Group in 2004 and backed since at least 2000 by J.P. Morgan . It was the first music company to perform an asset-backed securitization , led by Apollo Global Management , in December 2022. Its assets consisted of over 1 million copyrights to music older than 18 months. According to its CEO Bob Valentine, Concord derived about 85% of its revenue \"from catalog, rather than newly-developed, music\". As Valentine stated in his first interview, \"The phenomenon of artists' IP has never been more liquid; it is now a real and proven asset class. Investment bankers are focused on it, financiers are financing it, and then there's entities like us, that know how to buy rights, but also know how to manage them and have the relationships to do so.\" The share of catalog music in total album equivalent consumption in the United States rose from 62.8% to 72.6% between 2019 and 2023. \n\nThe publishers are seeking statutory damages for nearly 4,142 songs named in the suit, with a maximum possible fine of $621 million. The Internet Archive has argued that the primitive sound quality of the original recordings falls within the doctrine of \"fair use\" to digitize for preservation, that the number of downloads is so small it has almost no impact on the publishers' revenue, and over 95% of the collection is not readily available anywhere else. The plaintiffs said in response, \"if ever there were a theory of fair use invented for litigation, this is it.\" According to a legal source at Mayer Brown , the music publishers' case could be challenged as unconstitutional , since the granting of copyright to pre-1972 works in the MMA only benefitted record companies without having a systemic effect. ",
  "An inlier is an area of older rocks surrounded by younger rocks. Inliers are typically formed by the erosion of overlying younger rocks to reveal a limited exposure of the older underlying rocks. Faulting or folding may also contribute to the observed outcrop pattern. A classic example from Great Britain is that of the inlier of folded Ordovician and Silurian rocks at Horton in Ribblesdale in North Yorkshire which are surrounded by the younger flat-lying Carboniferous Limestone . The location has long been visited by geology students and experts. Another example from South Wales is the Usk Inlier in Monmouthshire where Silurian age rocks are upfolded amidst Old Red Sandstone rocks of Devonian age.\n\nA similar outcrop pattern which results from movement on a thrust fault followed by erosion may be termed a window .\n\nConversely an outlier is an area of younger rock surrounded by older rocks. An outlier is typically formed when sufficient erosion of surrounding rocks has taken place to sever the younger rock's original continuity with a larger mass of the same younger rocks nearby.\n\nOne example from Great Britain is the mass of Triassic sandstone around the Staffordshire town of Leek . This is isolated from the very much larger area of Triassic rocks which characterise the English Midlands and Cheshire Basin , to the south and west respectively, by the surrounding Carboniferous sandstones and mudstones . Similarly in the Black Mountains of South Wales , the summit area of Pen Cerrig-calch is composed from a suite of Carboniferous age sandstones and limestone . This outcrop is isolated from the main extent of these rocks (which form the South Wales Coalfield and its margins some miles to the south) by the Devonian Old Red Sandstone on which it rests by and by which it is surrounded. \n\nGrenvillian inliers located within the Appalachian orogeny include the Pine Mountain Belt in Georgia, the French Broad Massif along the Tennessee and North Carolina border, Sauratown Mountain Massif in North Carolina, the Shenandoah Massif in Virginia, the Baltimore Gneiss Domes in Maryland, the Honey Brook Upland in Pennsylvania, and the Reading Prong , which extends from Pennsylvania into New York. Other inliers include the Berkshire Massif, which extends from Massachusetts into Vermont, and the Green Mountain Massif in Vermont. Associated Canadian inliers include the Blair River Inlier on Cape Breton Island , Nova Scotia, the Steel Mountain Terrane on Newfoundland, and the Long Range Inlier on Newfoundland. \n\nIn West Africa, the Kenieba inlier borders southwestern Mali and eastern Senegal , and associated Birimian gold is found in Kalana and Sabodala respectively. \n\nA similar isolated arrangement of rocks produced for example by movement on a thrust fault followed by erosion may be termed a klippe . ",
  "A city-state is an independent sovereign city which serves as the center of political, economic, and cultural life over its contiguous territory. They have existed in many parts of the world throughout history, including cities such as Rome , Carthage , Athens and Sparta and the Italian city-states during the Middle Ages and Renaissance , such as Florence , Venice , Genoa and Milan .\n\nWith the rise of nation states worldwide, there remains some disagreement on the number of modern city-states that still exist; Singapore , Monaco and Vatican City are the candidates most commonly discussed. Out of these, Singapore is the largest and most populous, and is generally considered to be the last real city-state left in the world, with full sovereignty, international borders, its own currency , a robust military , and substantial international influence in its own right. The Economist refers to it as the \"world's only fully functioning city-state\". \n\nSeveral non-sovereign cities enjoy a high degree of autonomy and are often considered to be city-states, such as Hong Kong and Macau . Cities of the United Arab Emirates —most notably Dubai —are often cited as such as well. Some non-sovereign overseas territories, such as Gibraltar , are also sometimes called city-states. \n\nHistorical city-states included Sumerian cities such as Uruk and Ur ; Ancient Egyptian city-states, such as Thebes and Memphis ; the Phoenician cities (such as Tyre and Sidon ); the five Philistine city-states; the Berber city-states of the Garamantes ; the city-states of ancient Greece (the poleis such as Athens , Sparta , Thebes , and Corinth ); the Roman Republic (which grew from a city-state into a vast empire); the Italian city-states from the Middle Ages to the early modern period, such as Florence , Siena , Ferrara , Milan (which as they grew in power began to dominate neighboring cities) and Genoa and Venice , which became powerful thalassocracies ; the Mayan and other cultures of pre-Columbian Mesoamerica (including cities such as Chichen Itza , Tikal , Copán and Monte Albán ); the central Asian cities along the Silk Road ; the city-states of the Swahili coast ; Ragusa in Croatia ; Tbilisi in Georgia ; states of the medieval Russian lands such as Novgorod and Pskov ; free imperial cities of German-speaking Europe ; mueang of Indochina ; barangay states of the Philippines ; and many others. Danish historian Poul Holm has classed the Viking colonial cities in medieval Ireland , most importantly the Kingdom of Dublin , as city-states. \n\nIn Cyprus , the Phoenician settlement of Kition (in present-day Larnaca) was a city-state that existed from around 800 BC until the end of the 4th century BC.\n\nSome of the most well-known examples of city-state culture in human history are the ancient Greek city-states and the merchant city-states of Renaissance Italy , which organised themselves as independent centers. The success of regional units coexisting as autonomous actors in loose geographical and cultural unity, as in Italy and Greece , often prevented their amalgamation into larger national units. [ citation needed ] However, such small political entities often survived only for short periods because they lacked the resources to defend themselves against incursions by larger states (such as Roman conquest of Greece). Thus they inevitably gave way to larger organisations of society, including the empire and the nation-state . [ need quotation to verify ]\n\nIn the Holy Roman Empire (962–1806) over 80 Free Imperial Cities came to enjoy considerable autonomy in the Middle Ages and in early modern times, buttressed legally by international law following the Peace of Westphalia of 1648. Some, like three of the earlier Hanseatic cities – Bremen , Hamburg and Lübeck – pooled their economic relations with foreign powers and were able to wield considerable diplomatic clout. Individual cities often made protective alliances with other cities or with neighbouring regions, including the Hanseatic League (1358 – 17th century), the Swabian League of Cities (1331–1389), the Décapole (1354–1679) in the Alsace, or the Old Swiss Confederacy ( c. 1300 – 1798). The Swiss cantons of Zürich , Bern , Lucerne , Fribourg , Solothurn , Basel , Schaffhausen , and Geneva originated as city-states.\n\nAfter the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire in 1806, some cities – then members of different confederacies – officially became sovereign city-states, such as the Free Hanseatic City of Bremen (1806–11 and again 1813–71), the Free City of Frankfurt upon Main (1815–66), the Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg (1806–11 and again 1814–71), the Free and Hanseatic City of Lübeck (1806–11 and again 1813–71), and the Free City of Kraków (1815–1846). Under Habsburg rule the city of Fiume had the status of a corpus separatum (1779–1919), which – while falling short of an independent sovereignty – had many attributes of a city-state. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn Northern and Central Italy during the medieval and Renaissance periods, city-states — with various amounts of associated land — became the standard form of polity. Some of them, despite being de facto independent states, were formally part of the Holy Roman Empire . The era of the Italian states, in particular from the 11th to the 15th centuries, featured remarkable economic development, trade, manufacture, and mercantile capitalism, together with increasing urbanization, with remarkable influence throughout much of the Mediterranean world and Europe as a whole. During this time, most of the Italian city-states were ruled by one person, such as the Signoria or by a dynasty, such as the House of Gonzaga and the House of Sforza . \n\nIn the history of Mainland Southeast Asia , aristocratic groups, Buddhist leaders, and others organized settlements into autonomous or semi-autonomous city-states. These were referred to as mueang , and were usually related in a tributary relationship now described as mandala or as over-lapping sovereignty , in which smaller city-states paid tribute to larger ones that paid tribute to still larger ones—until reaching the apex in cities like Ayutthaya , Bagan , Bangkok and others that served as centers of Southeast Asian royalty. The system existed until the 19th century, when colonization by European powers occurred. Siam , a regional power at the time, needed to define their territories for negotiation with the European powers so the Siamese government established a nation-state system, incorporated their tributary cities ( Lan Xang , Cambodia and some Malay cities) into their territory and abolished the mueang and the tributary system. [ need quotation to verify ] \n\nIn early Philippine history, the barangay was a complex sociopolitical unit which scholars have historically considered the dominant organizational pattern among the various peoples of the Philippine archipelago . These sociopolitical units were sometimes also referred to as barangay states, but are more properly referred to using the technical term polity . Evidence suggests a considerable degree of independence as city states ruled by Datus , Rajahs and Sultans . Early chroniclers record that the name evolved from the term balangay , which refers to a plank boat widely used by various cultures of the Philippine archipelago prior to the arrival of European colonizers. \n\nThe Free City of Danzig was a semi- autonomous city-state that existed between 1920 and 1939, consisting of the Baltic Sea port of Danzig (now Gdańsk , Poland ) and nearly 200 towns in the surrounding areas. It was created on 15 November 1920 under the terms of Article 100 (Section XI of Part III) of the 1919 Treaty of Versailles after the end of World War I .\n\nAfter a prolonged period where the city of Fiume enjoyed considerable autonomy under Habsburg rule (see Corpus separatum (Fiume) ), The Free State of Fiume was proclaimed as a fully independent free state which existed between 1920 and 1924. Its territory of 28 km 2 (11 sq mi) comprised the city of Fiume (now in Croatia and, since the end of World War II, known as Rijeka , both names meaning \"river\" in the respective languages) and rural areas to its north, with a corridor to its west connecting it to Italy . [ citation needed ]\n\nUnder the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine of 1947, Mandatory Palestine was to be partitioned into three states: a Jewish state of Israel , an Arab state of Palestine , and a corpus separatum ( Latin for \" separated body \") consisting of a Jerusalem city-state under the control of United Nations Trusteeship Council . Although the plan had some international support and the UN accepted this proposal (and still officially holds the stance that Jerusalem should be held under this regime), implementation of the plan failed as the 1948 Palestine war broke out with the 1947–48 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine , ultimately resulting in Jerusalem being split into West Jerusalem and East Jerusalem . Israel would eventually gain control of East Jerusalem in the Six-Day War in 1967. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Klaipėda Region or Memel Territory was defined by the Treaty of Versailles in 1920 when it was put under the administration of the Council of Ambassadors . The Memel Territory was to remain under the control of the League of Nations until a future day when the people of the region would be allowed to vote on whether the land would return to Germany or not. The then predominantly ethnic German Memel Territory ( Prussian Lithuanians and Memellanders constituted the other ethnic groups), situated between the river and the town of that name, was occupied by Lithuania in the Klaipėda Revolt of 1923. [ citation needed ]\n\nSome proposals for the partition of the Ottoman Empire envisaged international zones at Istanbul /Constantinople or the wider Turkish straits , and possibly also at İzmir /Smyrna. Although the allies of World War I occupied both after the 1918 Armistice of Mudros , the British-led occupation of Istanbul recognised Turkey as de jure sovereign, while the Greek occupation of Smyrna was an attempted annexation . The 1923 Treaty of Lausanne re-established Turkish control of both areas. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Shanghai International Settlement (1845–1943) was an international zone with its own legal system, postal service, and currency.\n\nThe international zone within the city of Tangier , in North Africa was approximately 373 km 2 (144 sq mi). It was at first under the joint administration of France, Spain, and the United Kingdom, plus later Portugal, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Sweden, and the United States. The international zone was initially attached to Morocco. It then became a French-Spanish protectorate from 1923 until 29 October 1956, when it was reintegrated into the state of Morocco. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Free Territory of Trieste was an independent territory situated in Central Europe between northern Italy and Yugoslavia, facing the north part of the Adriatic Sea, under direct responsibility of the United Nations Security Council in the aftermath of World War II, from 1947 to 1954.\n\nIn the 20th century West Berlin , though lacking sovereignty, functioned from 1948 until 1990 as a state legally not belonging to any other state, but ruled by the Western Allies . They allowed – notwithstanding their overlordship as occupant powers – its internal organisation as one state simultaneously being a city, officially called Berlin (West). Though West Berlin maintained close ties to the West German Federal Republic, it never legally formed a part of it. [ citation needed ]\n\nUntil September 1870, the city of Rome had been controlled by the pope as part of his Papal States . When King Victor Emmanuel II seized the city in 1870, Pope Pius IX refused to recognize the newly formed Kingdom of Italy .\n\nBecause he could not travel without effectively acknowledging the authority of the king, Pius IX and his successors each claimed to be a \" Prisoner in the Vatican \", unable to leave the 0.44 km 2 (0.17 sq mi) papal enclave once they had ascended the papal throne .\n\nThe impasse was resolved in 1929 by the Lateran Treaties negotiated by the Italian dictator Benito Mussolini between King Victor Emmanuel III and Pope Pius XI . Under this treaty, Vatican City was recognized as an independent state, with the Pope as its head. The Vatican City State has its own citizenship , diplomatic corps , flag , and postage stamps . With a population of less than 1,000 (mostly clergymen), it is by far the smallest sovereign country in the world.\n\nThe Principality of Monaco is a very small independent city-state bordering France. Monaco-Ville (the ancient fortified city) and Monaco's well-known area Monte Carlo are districts of a continuous urban zone, not distinct cities, though they were three separate municipalities ( communes ) until 1917. The Principality of Monaco and the city of Monaco (each having specific powers) govern the same territory. Though they maintain a small military , largely for ceremonial purposes, they would still have to rely on France for defence in the face of an aggressive power. [ citation needed ]\n\nSingapore is an island city-state in Southeast Asia bordering Malaysia to the north and Indonesia to the south. 6 million people live and work within 728.3 square kilometres (281.2 sq mi), making Singapore the 2nd-most-densely populated country in the world after Monaco. Singapore was part of the Federation of Malaysia for two years before it was expelled from the federation in 1965, becoming an independent republic , a city and a sovereign country. The Economist refers to the nation as the \"world's only fully functioning city-state\". In particular, it has its own currency , a large commercial airport , one of the busiest trans-shipment maritime ports in the world , and fully fledged armed forces to safeguard the nation's sovereignty against potential regional aggressors. Singapore is also referred to as the only island city-state in the world by WorldAtlas. \n\nA number of other small states share many of these characteristics, and are sometimes cited as modern city-states. Luxembourg , Djibouti , Qatar , Brunei , Kuwait , Bahrain , and Malta are each politically and economically centered on a single city; in the cases of Luxembourg, Djibouti and Kuwait, this primate city is so dominant as to give its name to the country. These countries are distinct from true city-states such as Singapore in that they comprise both their primate city (such as Luxembourg City ) and a number of peripheral cities and towns (such as Esch-sur-Alzette and ten other towns in Luxembourg) with autonomous municipal authorities , and may also include substantial rural areas (such as the sparsely-populated Éislek forest of northern Luxembourg). [ citation needed ]\n\nOccasionally, microstates with high population densities such as San Marino are cited as city-states, despite lacking a large urban centre. \n\nSome cities or urban areas, while not sovereign states, may nevertheless be constituent states of a federation , or enjoy a high degree of autonomy. As such, they function as \"city-states\" within the context of the sovereign state to which they belong. Historian Mogens Herman Hansen describes this aspect of self-government as: \"The city-state is a self-governing, but not necessarily independent, political unit.\" A city with more limited self-government may be referred to as an independent city . [ citation needed ]\n\nSome non-sovereign cities which have a high degree of autonomy, and have been described as city-states, include:\n\nSome cities that are constituent states in a federation, and as such can be accurately described as non-sovereign city-states with a high degree of autonomy, include:\n\nThe Sovereign State of the Bektashi Order is a proposed city-state in Albanian capital of Tirana which will be established if approved by the Albanian Parliament and a national referendum. The state, which would be led by the Bektashi Order , is planned to be similar in structure to the Vatican City . The idea has been proposed by Albanian Prime Minister Edi Rama and leader of the Bektashi Order Baba Mondi in the hope that sovereignty would help promote moderate Muslim values instead of radical ideologies. The Sovereign State of the Bektashi Order would be surrounded by the suburbs of eastern Tirana and would be the smallest nation in the world .\n\nThe London independence movement seeks a city-state separate from the United Kingdom. ",
  "A birch is a thin-leaved deciduous hardwood tree of the genus Betula ( / ˈ b ɛ tj ʊ l ə / ), in the family Betulaceae , which also includes alders , hazels , and hornbeams . It is closely related to the beech - oak family Fagaceae . The genus Betula contains 30 to 60 known taxa of which 11 are on the IUCN 2011 Red List of Threatened Species. They are typically short-lived pioneer species and are widespread in the Northern Hemisphere , particularly in northern areas of temperate climates and in boreal climates . Birch wood is used for a wide range of purposes.\n\nBirch species are generally small to medium-sized trees or shrubs , mostly of northern temperate and boreal climates . The simple leaves are alternate, singly or doubly serrate , feather-veined, petiolate and stipulate. They often appear in pairs, but these pairs are really borne on spur-like, two-leaved, lateral branchlets . The fruit is a small samara , although the wings may be obscure in some species. They differ from the alders ( Alnus , another genus in the family) in that the female catkins are not woody and disintegrate at maturity, falling apart to release the seeds, unlike the woody, cone-like female alder catkins.\n\nThe bark of all birches is characteristically marked with long, horizontal lenticels , and often separates into thin, papery plates, especially upon the paper birch . Distinctive colors give the common names gray , white , black , silver and yellow birch to different species. \n\nThe buds , forming early and full-grown by midsummer , are all lateral, without a terminal bud forming; the branch is prolonged by the upper lateral bud. The wood of all the species is close-grained with a satiny texture and capable of taking a fine polish; its fuel value is fair.\n\nThe flowers are monoecious , and open with or before the leaves. Once fully grown, these leaves [ clarification needed ] are usually 3–6 millimetres ( 1 ⁄ 8 – 1 ⁄ 4 in) long on three-flowered clusters in the axils of the scales of drooping or erect catkins or aments. Staminate catkins are pendulous, clustered, or solitary in the axils of the last leaves of the branch of the year or near the ends of the short lateral branchlets of the year. They form in early autumn and remain rigid during the winter. The scales of the mature staminate catkins are broadly ovate, rounded, yellow or orange colour below the middle and dark chestnut brown at apex. Each scale bears two bractlets and three sterile flowers, each flower consisting of a sessile, membranous, usually two-lobed, calyx. Each calyx bears four short filaments with one-celled anthers or strictly, two filaments divided into two branches, each bearing a half-anther. Anther cells open longitudinally. The pistillate segments are erect or pendulous, and solitary, terminal on the two-leaved lateral spur-like branchlets of the year. The pistillate scales are oblong-ovate, three-lobed, pale yellow-green often tinged with red, becoming brown at maturity. These scales bear two or three fertile flowers, each flower consisting of a naked ovary. The ovary is compressed, two-celled, and crowned with two slender styles; the ovule is solitary. Each scale bears a single small, winged nut that is oval, with two persistent stigmas at the apex.\n\nBetula species are organised into five subgenera.\n\nNote: many American texts have B. pendula and B. pubescens confused, though they are distinct species with different chromosome numbers.\n\nThe common name birch comes from Old English birce , bierce , from Proto-Germanic * berk-jōn (cf. German Birke , West Frisian bjirk ), an adjectival formation from * berkōn (cf. Dutch berk , Low German Bark , Danish birk , Norwegian bjørk ), itself from the Proto-Indo-European root * bʰerHǵ- ~ bʰrHǵ -, which also gave Lithuanian béržas , Latvian Bērzs , Russian берёза (berëza) , Ukrainian береза ( beréza) , Albanian bredh 'fir', Ossetian bærz(æ) , Sanskrit bhurja , Polish brzoza , Latin fraxinus 'ash (tree)'. This root is presumably derived from * bʰreh₁ǵ- 'to shine, whiten', in reference to the birch's white bark. The Proto-Germanic rune berkanan is named after the birch.\n\nThe generic name Betula is from Latin , which is a diminutive borrowed from Gaulish betua (cf. Old Irish bethe , Welsh bedw ).\n\nWithin Betulaceae, birches are most closely related to alder. The oldest known birch fossils are those of Betula leopoldae from the Klondike Mountain Formation in Washington State, US, which date to the early Eocene ( Ypresian ) around 49 million years ago. \n\nBirches often form even-aged stands on light, well-drained, particularly acidic soils . They are regarded as pioneer species , rapidly colonizing open ground especially in secondary successional sequences following a disturbance or fire. Birches are early tree species to become established in primary successions , and can become a threat to heathland if the seedlings and saplings are not suppressed by grazing or periodic burning. Birches are generally lowland species, but some species, such as Betula nana , have a montane distribution. In the British Isles , there is some difference between the environments of Betula pendula and Betula pubescens , and some hybridization, though both are \"opportunists in steady-state woodland systems\". Mycorrhizal fungi , including sheathing (ecto)mycorrhizas, are found in some cases to be beneficial to tree growth. \n\nA large number of lepidopteran insects feed on birch foliage.\n\nBecause of the hardness of birch, it is easier to shape it with power tools; it is quite difficult to work it with hand tools. \n\nThe inner bark is considered edible as an emergency food, even when raw. It can be dried and ground into flour, as was done by Native Americans and early settlers. It can also be cut into strips and cooked like noodles. \n\nThe sap can be drunk or used to make syrup and birch beer . Tea can be made from the red inner bark of black birches. \n\nWhite-barked birches in particular are cultivated as ornamental trees, largely for their appearance in winter. The Himalayan birch, Betula utilis , especially the variety or subspecies jacquemontii , is among the most widely planted for this purpose. It has been cultivated since the 1870s, and many cultivars are available, including 'Doorenbos', 'Grayswood Ghost' and 'Silver Shadow'; 'Knightshayes' has a slightly weeping habit. Other species with ornamental white bark include Betula ermanii , Betula papyrifera , Betula pendula and Betula raddeana . \n\nIn the European Union, a prescription gel containing birch bark extract (commercial name Episalvan , betulae cortex dry extract (5–10 : 1); extraction solvent: n -heptane 95% (w/w)) was approved in 2016 for the topical treatment of minor skin wounds in adults. Although its mechanism of action in helping to heal injured skin is not fully understood, birch bark extract appears to stimulate the growth of keratinocytes which then fill the wound. \n\nPreliminary research indicates that the phytochemicals , betulin and possibly other triterpenes , are active in Episalvan gel and wound healing properties of birch bark. \n\nOver centuries, birch bark was used in traditional medicine practices by North American indigenous people for treating superficial wounds by applying bark directly to the skin. Splints made with birch bark were used as casts for broken limbs in the 16th century . \n\nWood pulp made from birch gives relatively long and slender fibres for a hardwood . The thin walls cause the fibre to collapse upon drying, giving a paper with low bulk and low opacity. The birch fibres are, however, easily fibrillated and give about 75% of the tensile strength of softwood. [ clarification needed ] The low opacity makes it suitable for making glassine .\n\nIn India , the birch ( Sanskrit : भुर्ज, bhurja ) holds great historical significance in the culture of North India , where the thin bark coming off in winter was extensively used as writing paper. Birch paper (Sanskrit: भुर्ज पत्र, bhurja patra ) is exceptionally durable and was the material used for many ancient Indian texts. The Roman period Vindolanda tablets also use birch as a material on which to write and birch bark was used widely in ancient Russia as notepaper ( beresta ) and for decorative purposes and even making footwear ( lapti ) and baskets. [ citation needed ]\n\nBirch wood is sometimes used as a tonewood for semiacoustic and acoustic guitar bodies, and occasionally for solid-body guitar bodies. It is also a common material used in mallets for keyboard percussion . [ citation needed ] Drum manufacturers, such as Gretsch and Yamaha , have been known to use birch wood in the construction of drum shells, owing to its strength and colour which takes stain in an appealing way, and which can also amber over very well, while also giving the drums an appealing tone which changes depending on the type of birch used. \n\nBirches have spiritual importance in several religions, both modern and historical. In Celtic cultures, the birch symbolises growth, renewal, stability, initiation, and adaptability because it is highly adaptive and able to sustain harsh conditions with casual indifference. Proof of this adaptability is seen in its easy and eager ability to repopulate areas damaged by forest fires or clearings. Birches are also associated with Tír na nÓg , the land of the dead and the Sidhe , in Gaelic folklore, and as such frequently appear in Scottish, Irish, and English folksongs and ballads in association with death, or fairies, or returning from the grave. The leaves of the silver birch tree are used in the festival of St George, held in Novosej and other villages in Albania. \n\nThe birch is New Hampshire 's state tree and the national tree of Finland and Russia. The yellow birch is the official tree of the province of Quebec (Canada). The birch is a very important element in Russian culture and represents the grace, strength, tenderness and natural beauty of Russian women as well as the closeness to nature of the Russians. It's associated with marriage and love. There are numerous folkloric Russian songs in which the birch tree occurs. The Ornäs birch is the national tree of Sweden. The Czech word for the month of March, Březen, is derived from the Czech word bříza meaning birch, as birch trees flower in March under local conditions. The silver birch tree is of special importance to the Swedish city of Umeå . In 1888, the Umeå city fire spread all over the city and nearly burnt it down to the ground, but some birches, supposedly, halted the spread of the fire. To protect the city against future fires, wide avenues were created, and these were lined with silver birch trees all over the city. Umeå later adopted the unofficial name of \"City of the Birches ( Björkarnas stad )\". Also, the ice hockey team of Umeå is called Björklöven , translated to English \"The Birch Leaves\". [ citation needed ]\n\n\"Swinging\" birch trees was a common game for American children in the nineteenth century. American poet Lucy Larcom 's \"Swinging on a Birch Tree\" celebrates the game. The poem inspired Robert Frost , who pays homage to the act of climbing birch trees in his more famous poem, \"Birches\". Frost once told \"it was almost sacrilegious climbing a birch tree till it bent, till it gave and swooped to the ground, but that's what boys did in those days\". ",
  "Adat ( Arabic : عادات ; Lezgian : Адат ; Chechen : Адат ; Avar : Адат ; Malay : عادت ; Chagatay : ئادەت ; Urdu : عادت ; Pashto : عادت ; Serbian : адет adet ) is a generic term derived from Arabic to describe a variety of local customary practices and traditions deemed compatible with Islam as observed by Muslim communities in the Balkans , North Caucasus , Central Asia , and Southeast Asia . Despite its Arabic origin, the term adat resonates deeply throughout Maritime Southeast Asia , where due to colonial influence, its usage has been systematically institutionalised into various non-Muslim communities. Within the region, the term refers, in a broader sense, to the customary norms, rules, interdictions, and injunctions that guide individuals' conduct as members of the community and the sanctions and forms of address by which these norms and rules are upheld. Adat also includes the set of local and traditional laws and dispute resolution systems by which these societies are regulated.\n\nThe word adat is derived from the Arabic ʿādā́t (عادات), the plural form of ʿā́da (عادَة), meaning custom, or habit, and is considered synonymous with urf (عرف), something which is commonly known or accepted. It generally refers to the result of long-standing convention, either deliberately adopted or the result of unconscious adaptation to circumstances, that has been followed where practical considerations have been uppermost. \n\nPrior to the arrival of Islam, the peoples of the North Caucasus and Central Asia had long-established codes of legal and civil law, which in the Islamic period came to be known by the term adat . Adat in traditional Central Asian societies are guided by authoritative members of communities, usually councils of Aqsaqals . It is based on a tribal code of conduct and on centuries of experience in conflict resolution between individuals, communities, and tribes. In the North Caucasus, the traditional value codex of adat held that the Teip ('clan') was the chief reference for loyalty, honor, shame, and collective responsibility. The Russian Empire 's colonial administration did not interfere with local legal practices and delegated the administration at the local community level to the councils of aqsaqals and teips, as did the Bolsheviks during the first years of the revolution of 1917 . The adat was practiced among the Central Asians and North Caucasians up until the early 1930s, before Soviet authorities banned its use and replaced it with civil law. \n\nIn Southeast Asia , the concept of adat and its meanings were first formulated in the Islamised Malay-speaking world , apparently to distinguish non-Islamic from Islamic practices. In the fifteenth century, the Melaka empire developed a code of international shipping law, Undang-Undang Laut Melaka , and a civil and commercial code, Undang-Undang Melaka , which was heavily Islamic but with extensive adat influences. These codes would later spread across the region and become the legal source for local jurisprudence in major regional sultanates like Brunei , Johor , Pattani , and Aceh . \n\nIn the early decades of the twentieth century, in the Dutch East Indies , the study of adat emerged as a specialised field of inquiry. Although associated with the needs of colonial administration, this study nevertheless gave rise to an active scholarly discipline that dealt with differing systems of adat comparatively. Among notable scholars in this study were Cornelis van Vollenhoven , Ter Haar, and Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje . Several key concepts that are still being used today within the customary law research in modern Indonesia are: adatrecht ('adat law'), adatrechtskringen ('adat law circles'), beschikkingsrecht (communal rights over land or 'right to avail'), and adatrechtsgemeenschappen ('adat law communities'). The adat law or adatrecht has been used by colonial governments as a legal term designating a prescriptive right, which was given currency as an independent legal entity apart from the canon law . Local indigenous laws and customs of all ethnic groups, including those of non-Muslims, began to be collectively termed as \"adat\" and were encoded into units of jural management, whereby legal pluralism in the East Indies was introduced. Under this scheme, based on a classification of adat systems as cultural geographic units, the Dutch divided the East Indies into at least nineteen adat law areas. \n\nAdat is still enforced in the courts of Brunei, Malaysia, and Indonesia as personal law in certain aspects. In Malaysia, each state's constitution has empowered Malay rulers as the head of Islam and Malay customs in their respective state. State councils known as Majlis Agama Islam dan Adat Istiadat Melayu (Council of Islam and Malay Customs) are responsible in advising the rulers as well as regulating both Islamic affairs and adat. Legal proceedings on matters related to Islamic affairs and adat (such as harta sepencarian or 'matrimonial property' cases) are carried out in Syariah Court . In Sarawak and Sabah , native adat laws of non-Malay indigenous communities were institutionalised through the establishment of courts known as Mahkamah Bumiputera (' Bumiputra courts') and Mahkamah Anak Negeri ('native courts'), respectively. A parallel system exists in Peninsular Malaysia for ethnic Malays, called Mahkamah Penghulu ( Penghulu 's courts— Mukim headman courts) but with very limited jurisdiction. In Indonesia, adat rules are still of legal relevance in some areas, especially in most Hindu villages in Bali , the Tenger area , and in the regions of Yogyakarta and Surakarta .\n\nFollowing the dissolution of the Soviet Union , adat practices in Central Asia began to be resurrected in the 1990s among rural communities. This was largely due to a decay of legal and law-enforcement institutions in many parts of the region. Legal constitutions also contributed to this process, since they empowered some traditional institutions, such as councils of elders (aqsaqals), with some administrative authorities. In the North Caucasus, traditional, clan-based systems of self-government, which had been functioning underground since the 1950s, began to reappear in response to the federal government's neglect and local administrative impotence. Due to the loss of Islamic scholars and literature during the Stalinist years, the adat that emerged contained almost no elements of Islamic law. However, there is growing participation by Muslim scholars in adat proceedings, some of whom are now involved in important decisions in village assemblies and district administrations. \n\nIn the Malay states of Southeast Asia, the Malay community may be classified formally and historically into two different groups: one following Adat temenggung and the other, Adat perpatih .\n\nAdat temenggung (customs or rules of Temenggung ) is the most common form of adat, which is patrilineal and more pervasive, and it can be found in the majority of Malay states. Adat perpatih , confined almost exclusively to Negeri Sembilan , where dwell the descendants of the Minangkabau immigrants from West Sumatra , is associated with a matrilineal rule of descent and a political structure based upon the kinship system. \n\nThough both adat originated from tribal organizations in the past, it is in Adat perpatih that the remnants of tribal structure are clearly evident at present. To cite one instance, marriage between two persons belonging to the same clan is regarded as incestuous and is strictly prohibited. \n\nThe major concern with adat, both temenggung and perpatih , in the research and literature, has been with so-called undang-undang adat law , or customary law , or the definition of rights to property, rank, and other privileges in traditional Malay society. Studies of adat law have chiefly been preoccupied with the questions of its relationship to Islamic ( Sharia ) law and the legal cases to which such conflicts have given rise. In Malay culture, there are at least five different perspectives of adat:",
  "Naturism is a lifestyle of practicing non-sexual social nudity in private and in public; the word also refers to the cultural movement which advocates and defends that lifestyle. Both may alternatively be called nudism . Though the two terms are broadly interchangeable, nudism emphasizes the practice of nudity, whilst naturism highlights an attitude favoring harmony with nature and respect for the environment, into which that practice is integrated. That said, naturists come from a range of philosophical and cultural backgrounds; there is no single naturist ideology.\n\nEthical or philosophical nudism has a long history, with many advocates of the benefits of enjoying nature without clothing. At the turn of the 20th century, organizations emerged to promote social nudity and to establish private campgrounds and resorts for that purpose. Since the 1960s, with the acceptance of public places for clothing-optional recreation, individuals who do not identify themselves as naturists or nudists have been able to casually participate in nude activities. Nude recreation opportunities vary widely around the world, from isolated places known mainly to locals through officially designated nude beaches and parks, and on to public spaces and buildings in some jurisdictions.\n\nThe XIV Congress of the International Naturist Federation (INF) held at Agde, France in 1974 defined naturism as: \n\n...a way of life in harmony with nature characterised by the practice of communal nudity with the intention of encouraging self-respect, respect for others and for the environment.\n\nMany contemporary naturists and naturist organisations advocate that the practice of social nudity should not be linked with sexual activity. Some recent studies show that naturism can help grow self-esteem, and thus have a positive impact on having a well-balanced sexuality, too. For various sociocultural and historical reasons, the lay public, the media, and many contemporary naturists and their organisations have, or present, a simplified view of the relationship between naturism and sexuality. As of 2009 [update] , research has begun to explore this complex relationship. \n\nThe International Naturist Federation explains: [ a ]\n\nEach country has its own kind of naturism, and even each club has its own special character, for we too, human beings, have each our own character which is reflected in our surroundings.\n\nThe usage and definition of these terms varies geographically and historically. [ b ] Naturism and nudism have the same meaning in the United States, but there is a clear distinction between the two terms in Great Britain. [ c ] [ further explanation needed ]\n\nIn naturist parlance, the terms \" textile \" or \"textilist\" refer to non-naturist persons, behaviours or facilities (e.g. \"the textile beach starts at the flag\", \"they are a mixed couple – he is naturist, she is textile\"). \"Textile\" is the predominant term used in the UK (\"textilist\" is unknown in British naturist magazines, including H&E naturist ), but some naturists avoid using this term due to perceived negative or derogatory connotations. \"Textilist\" is said to be used interchangeably with \"textile\", but no dictionary definition to this effect exists, nor are there any equivalent examples of use in mainstream literature such as those for \"textile\". \n\nAt naturist-organised events or venues, clothing is usually optional. At naturist swimming pools or sunbathing places, however, complete nudity is expected (weather permitting). This rule is sometimes a source of controversy among naturists. Staff at a naturist facility are usually required to be clothed due to health and safety regulations. \n\nFacilities for naturists are classified in various ways. A landed or members' naturist club is one that owns its own facilities. Non-landed (or travel) clubs meet at various locations, such as private residences, swimming pools, hot springs, landed clubs and resorts, or rented facilities. Landed clubs can be run by members on democratic lines or by one or more owners who make the rules. In either case, they can determine membership criteria and the obligations of members. This usually involves sharing work necessary to maintain or develop the site. \n\nThe international naturist organizations were mainly composed of representatives of landed clubs. \" Nudist colony \" is no longer a favored term, but can be used by naturists to address landed clubs that have rigid non-inclusive membership criteria.\n\nA holiday centre is a facility that specializes in providing apartments, chalets and camping pitches for visiting holidaymakers. A center is run commercially, and visitors are not members and have no say in the management. Most holiday centers expect visitors to hold an INF card (that is, to belong to an INF-affiliated organization), but some have relaxed this requirement, relying on the carrying of a trade card. Holiday centers vary in size. Larger holiday centres may have swimming pools, sports pitches, an entertainment program, kids' clubs, restaurants and supermarkets. Some holiday centres allow regular visitors to purchase their own chalets, and generations of the same families may visit each year. Holiday centres are more tolerant of clothing than members-only clubs; total nudity is usually compulsory in the swimming pools and may be expected on the beaches, while on the football pitches, or in the restaurants in the evening, it is rare. \n\nA naturist resort is, to a European, a private property with accommodation and facilities where naturism is the norm. Centre Helio-Marin in Vendays Montalivet , France (the first naturist resort, established in 1950); the naturist village of Charco del Palo on Lanzarote , Canary Islands; Vera Playa in Spain; and Vritomartis Resort in Greece are examples.\n\nIn US usage, a naturist resort can mean a holiday centre. Freikörperkultur (FKK)—literally translated as 'free body culture'—is the name for the general movement in Germany. The abbreviation is recognised outside of Germany and can be found on informal signs indicating the direction to a remote naturist beach. \n\nIn some European countries, such as Denmark, all beaches are clothing optional, and in others like Germany (and experimentally in France) there are naturist sunbathing areas in public parks (e.g., in Munich and Berlin). Beaches in some holiday destinations, such as Crete, are clothing optional except some central urban beaches. There are two centrally located clothes-optional beaches in Barcelona. Sweden allows nudity on all beaches. \n\nIn a survey by The Daily Telegraph , Germans and Austrians were most likely to have visited a nude beach (28%), followed by Norwegians (18%), Spaniards (17%), Australians (17%), and New Zealanders (16%). Of the nationalities surveyed, the Japanese (2%) were the least likely to have visited a nude beach. This result may indicate the lack of nude beaches in Japan; however, the Japanese are open with regard to family bathing nude at home and at onsens (hot springs). \n\nFrom Woodstock to Edinburgh , and Nambassa in the southern hemisphere, communal nudity can be seen at music and counterculture festivals. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Nambassa hippie festivals held in New Zealand in the late 1970s were examples of non-sexual naturism. Of the 75,000 patrons who attended the 1979 Nambassa three-day festival, an estimated 35% of attendees spontaneously chose to remove their clothing, preferring complete or partial nudity. \n\nSome nudist festivals are held to celebrate particular days of the year, and activities may include nude bodypainting . One example is the Neptune Day Festival held in Koktebel , Crimea to depict mythological events. Another is the Festival Nudista Zipolite organized by the Federación Nudista de México (Mexican Nudist Federation) held annually since 2016 on the first weekend of February. \n\nA few camps organize activities in the nude, such as oil wrestling by camp Gymnasium. \n\nNaturism tends to be more common during the warmer summer months. Some regions host first-time naturists and people who have recently started to practice the naturist lifestyle. One study noted that some of these people are seasonal naturists who wear clothes during other times of the year. \n\nNudity in social contexts has been practised in various forms by many cultures and in all time periods. In modern Western society, social nudity is most frequently encountered in the contexts of bathing, swimming and using saunas, but throughout history and in many contemporary tropical cultures, nudity is a norm at many sports events and competitions. \n\nThe first known use of the word naturisme occurred in 1778. A French-speaking Belgian, Jean Baptiste Luc Planchon (1734–1781), used the term to advocate nudism as a means of improving the hygiène de vie or healthy living. \n\nThe earliest known naturist club in the western sense of the word was established in British India in 1891. The Fellowship of the Naked Trust was founded by Charles Edward Gordon Crawford, a widower who was a District and Sessions Judge for the Bombay Civil Service . The commune was based in Matheran and had just three members at the beginning: Crawford and two sons of an Anglican missionary, Andrew and Kellogg Calderwood. The commune fell apart when Crawford was transferred to Ratnagiri ; he died soon after in 1894. \n\nIn 1902, a series of philosophical papers was published in Germany by Dr. Heinrich Pudor under the pseudonym Heinrich Scham, who coined the term Nacktkultur (Nude Culture). In 1906, he wrote a three-volume treatise with this term as its title, which discussed the benefits of nudity in co-education and advocated participating in sports while being free of cumbersome clothing. Richard Ungewitter ( Nacktheit , 1906, Nackt , 1908, etc.) proposed that combining physical fitness, sunlight, and fresh-air bathing with the nudist philosophy contributed to mental and psychological fitness, good health, and an improved moral-life view. Major promoters of these ideas included Adolf Koch and Hans Surén [ de ] , who was an instructor and manager at the German Army School of Military Physical Education in Wünsdorf . Germany published the first journal of nudism from 1902 to 1932, during which time it evolved and became known as Freikörperkultur (FKK), the free body culture movement. \n\nThe wide publication of those papers, and others, contributed to an explosive worldwide growth of nudism in which nudists participated in various social, recreational, and physical fitness activities in the nude. The first organized club for nudists on a large scale, Freilichtpark (Open-Air Park), was opened near Hamburg in 1903 by Paul Zimmerman. In 1919, German doctor Kurt Huldschinsky discovered that exposure to sunlight helped to cure rickets in many children, causing sunlight to be associated with improved health. \n\nIn France in the early 20th century, the brothers Gaston and André Durville , both physicians, studied the effects of psychology, nutrition, and environment on health and healing. They became convinced of the importance of natural foods and the natural environment on human well-being and health. They named this concept naturisme . The profound effect of clean air and sunlight on human bodies became evident to them and so nudity became a part of their naturism. \n\nNaturism became a more widespread phenomenon in the 1920s in Germany, the United Kingdom, France and other European countries and spread to the United States, where it became established in the 1930s. In Brazil, nudist magazines were already published in the 1930. In mid 50s, there were several of such publications and some editors were persecuted by police and sued by authorities under the charge of \"indecent exposure\". \n\nBy 1951, the various national federations united to form the International Naturist Federation. Some naturists preferred not to join clubs, and after 1945, pressure arose to designate beaches for naturist use. From the middle of the 20th century, with changing leisure patterns, commercial organisations began opening holiday resorts to attract naturists who expected the same – or better – standards of comfort and amenity offered to non-naturists. More recently, naturist holiday options have expanded to include cruises. \n\nIn the early 21st century, many organised clubs saw a decline in attendance by young people, which worried many naturists about the future of the movement. The clubs' aging memberships may have put younger people off. A rise in social conservatism , re-asserting a nudity taboo, also may have contributed to the decline. However, since tolerance for nudity in general is increasing over time, and is higher among younger generations, an alternative hypothesis is that younger naturists no longer feel they need to join a club or visit a resort in order to practise naturism. Active recruitment of younger members is being pursued by some organisations. The phenomenon varies by country, with, for example, naturism in France experiencing steady growth in a younger demographic during the 2010s. A similar trend is seen in Germany, with young people eager to depart from social norms and beauty standards. \n\nNaturism was part of a literary movement [ fr ] in the late 19th century (see the writings of André Gide ) that also influenced the art movements of the time, specifically Henri Matisse and other Fauve painters. This movement was based on the French concept of joie de vivre , the idea of reveling freely in physical sensations and direct experiences and a spontaneous approach to life. \n\nNaturist activities can have positive psychological benefits including greater life satisfaction, more positive body image, and higher self-esteem. Social nudity leads to acceptance in spite of differences in age, body shape, fitness, and health. \n\nChristian naturism includes various members associated with most denominations . Although beliefs vary, a common theme is that much of Christianity has misinterpreted the events regarding the Garden of Eden , and that God was displeased with Adam and Eve for covering their bodies with fig leaves . \n\nNaturism is usually promoted as not being sexual, but there are resorts where social nudity is practised alongside exhibitionism , voyeurism , and other alternative lifestyles like swinging . Mainstream discourse around naturism sometimes conflates sexual and non-sexual variations, though family-oriented naturism organisations try to resist this stigma. Some naturist clubs have shifted to catering to swingers, and as a result may be expelled from mainstream naturist organizations, whilst some naturist villages, notably Cap d'Agde , have been successfully overtaken by swingers and \" libertines \". Others struggle with wanting to maintain a family image while being lax in behavior enforcements for fear of losing revenue and no longer being financially viable. Attempts have been made to legislate naturist activity, such as children's summer camps. \n\nMany films and published materials in the middle decades of the 20th century were presented as documentaries of the naturist lifestyle. In fact this was largely a pretext to exploit a loophole in censorship laws restricting the exhibition of nudity. Additionally, child pornography has been distributed under the guise of naturist media. Precisely defining the distinction has proved challenging for law enforcers, as it depends on the subjective question of whether the purpose of the production is sexual. Court cases attempting to differentiate naturist publications from pornography reach back almost a century. \n\nMpenjati beach in KwaZulu-Natal province of South Africa has nude-beach status. \n\nIn most European countries, nudity is not explicitly forbidden. Whether it is tolerated on beaches which are not marked as official nudist beaches varies greatly. The only country with substantially different laws is Denmark, where beach nudity is explicitly allowed on all beaches, except for two in the far west of the country. \n\nOrganized naturism in Belgium began in 1924 when engineer Joseph-Paul Swenne founded the Belgian League of Heliophilous Propaganda (usually abbreviated to Hélios ) in Uccle . This was followed four years later by De Spar , founded by Jozef Geertz and hosted on the country estate of entrepreneur Oswald Johan de Schampelaere. Belgian naturism was influenced in equal part by French naturism and German Freikörperkultur . Belgian naturists are represented by the Federatie van Belgische Naturisten (FBN). \n\nCroatia is world-famous for naturism, which accounts for about 15% of its tourism industry. It was also the first European country to develop commercial naturist resorts. During a 1936 Adriatic cruise, King Edward VIII and Wallis Simpson stopped at a beach on the island of Rab where King Edward obtained special permission from the local government to swim naked, this event marked the beginning of nudist tourism in Croatia. \n\nIn Finnish culture, nudism is considered to be a relatively normal way to live. It is not uncommon to see entire families spending time together naked. Families may be naked while bathing, in a sauna , swimming in a pool, or playing on a beach, and it is not unusual to see children playing naked in a family yard for example. Nudity as a whole is considered less taboo than in many other countries. \n\nMarcel Kienné de Mongeot is credited with starting naturism in France in 1920. His family had suffered from tuberculosis, and he saw naturism as a cure and a continuation of the traditions of the ancient Greeks. In 1926, he started the magazine Vivre intégralement (later titled Vivre ) and the first French naturist club, Sparta Club , at Garambouville, near Évreux. The court action that he initiated established that nudism was legal on private property that was fenced and screened. \n\nDrs. André and Gaston Durville bought 70 hectares (170 acres) on the Île du Levant where they established the village of Héliopolis, which was open to the public. In 1925, Dr. François Fougerat de David de Lastours wrote a thesis on heliotherapy , and in that year, he opened the Club gymnique de France . In 1936, the naturist movement was officially recognised. \n\nAlbert and Christine Lecocq were active members of many of these clubs, but they left after disagreements, and in 1944, they founded the Club du Soleil with members in 84 cities. Four years later, they founded the Fédération Française de Naturisme [ fr ] (FFN); in 1949, they started the magazine Vie au Soleil , and in 1950, they opened the CHM Montalivet , the world's first naturist holiday centre, where the INF was formed. \n\nHenri Zisly was another prominent figure and primitivist in the French naturism movement who wrote on a return to lifestyles based on self-sufficiency. \n\nGerman naturism ( Freikörperkultur , FKK) was part of the Lebensreform movement and the Wandervogel youth movement of 1896, from Steglitz , Berlin, which promoted ideas of fitness and vigour. At the same time, doctors of the Naturheilbewegung (Natural Healing Movement) were using heliotherapy, treating diseases such as tuberculosis, rheumatism, and scrofula with exposure to sunlight. \n\nNacktkultur , a term coined in 1903 by Heinrich Pudor, connected nudity, vegetarianism and social reform, and was practised in a network of 200 members clubs. The movement gained prominence in the 1920s by offering a health-giving lifestyle with Utopian ideals. Germany published the first naturist journal from 1902 to 1932, but it became politicised by radical socialists who believed it would lead to classlessness and a breakdown of society. It eventually became associated with pacificism . \n\nIn 1926, Adolf Koch established a school of naturism in Berlin, encouraging a mixing of the sexes, open air exercises, and a programme of \"sexual hygiene\". In 1929 the Berlin school hosted the first International Congress on Nudity. \n\nAfter World War II, East Germans were free to practice naturism, chiefly at beaches rather than clubs (private organizations were regarded as potentially subversive). Naturism became a large element in DDR politics. The Proletarische Freikörperkulturbewegung subsection of the Workers Sports Organisation had 60,000 members. Since reunification there are many clubs, parks and beaches open to naturists, though nudity has become less common in the former eastern zone. Germans are typically the most commonly seen visitors at nude beaches in France and around Europe. \n\nThere are no official nude beaches, however there are unofficial nude beaches on the islands frequented by tourists, like Crete, Mykonos or Karpathos, and on smaller islands like Skopelos or Skiathos where nudity is tolerated, usually at the more remote ends or secluded areas of beaches. \n\nToplessness also is widely practiced by locals and tourists alike as there are no cultural taboos against it. \n\nIn 2015, a court in Thessaloniki, Greece's second largest city, acquitted nudist activists who were charged for wandering naked in the city as part of their activist actions for promoting the urban nudism. In its ruling, the court deemed these acts to be \"not lewd or lascivious\", and vindicated the activists, thus recognizing their right to be naked publicly. \n\nFull nudity is allowed in Italy in the official naturist beaches and places of the country, and in many other places where there is an established tradition of naturist attendance, as confirmed by a recent absolution sentence. In all other public places, full nudity is generally prohibited by civil law and could be punished with fines that have been recently reduced (minimum €51 to maximum €309). In the last decades, six regions have created laws to promote naturist tourism, and actually there are more than 20 official naturist beaches in Italy, where naturism is recognised and guaranteed by administrative acts, and more than 30 beaches with a long tradition of naturist attendance where nudity is accepted. Naturist accommodations are located in most of the regions and it is estimated that the number of nudists and naturists in Italy is about 500,000 people. Since the 1960s, there have been naturist associations in many regions, and a naturist federation on a national level. [ citation needed ]\n\nFemale toplessness is allowed, in a nonsexual context, in all the beaches of the country. On March 20, 2000, the Supreme Court of Cassation through sentence No. 3557 has determined that the exposure of the nude female breast since some decades is considered a \"commonly accepted behavior\" and therefore has \"entered into the social custom\". Since then, local government regulations forbidding toplessness are extremely rare.\n\nThe oldest Dutch naturist association is Zon en Leven ('Sun and Life'), founded in 1946 with the aim of promoting healthy physical and mental development and a natural way of life. The national association is Naturisten Federatie Nederland (NFN), which in 2017 adopted the name Bloot Gewoon! ('Simply Naked') in an effort to become more accessible to casual naturists and strengthen the acceptance of nude recreation. \n\nIn general, Dutch people are very tolerant of beach nudity, as long as it does not impact others, or involve inappropriate staring or sexual behaviour. Topless sunbathing is permitted on most beaches except where prohibited by signage. \n\nThe Federação Portuguesa de Naturismo (Portuguese Naturist Federation) or FPN was founded on 1 March 1977 in Lisbon. In the 21st century, naturism is considered a tolerated practice, whereas there are many officially designated nudist beaches. \n\nIn modern-day Poland, naturism is practiced in number of the seaside and inland beaches. Most Polish beaches of this type are actually clothing-optional rather than naturist. One such beach is Międzyzdroje-Lubiewo . \n\nPublic nudity in Spain is not illegal since there is no law banning its practice. Spanish legislation foresees felony for exhibitionism but restricts its scope to obscene exposure in front of children or mentally impaired individuals, i.e. with sexual connotation. [ clarification needed ] There are, however, some municipalities (like San Pedro del Pinatar ) where public nudity has been banned by means of by-laws. Other municipalities (like Barcelona, Salou, Platja de Palma and Sant Antoni de Portmany) have used similar provisions to regulate partial nudity, requiring people to cover their torsos on the streets. Some naturist associations have appealed these by-laws on the grounds that a fundamental right ( freedom of expression , as they understand nudism to be self-expression) cannot be regulated with such a mechanism. Some courts have ruled in favour of nudist associations. Nudism in Spain is normally practised by the seaside, on beaches or small coves with a tradition of naturism. In Vera, Spain, there is a wide residential area formed by nudist urbanisations. Nudist organisations may organise some activities elsewhere in inner territory.\n\nResearch was done on the island of Menorca , where naturism is practiced at small, isolated beaches apart from the island's developed resorts. Not everyone on these beaches, even within a group, is nude, and both types of participants were interviewed. Most were white heterosexuals between the ages of 25 and 40 who live in cities such as Madrid or Barcelona. For them, being nude on a beach is about bodily sensations of sun, sea, and sand directly on the skin, not about cultural meanings or performance of bodily appearance. The behaviors that support the non-sexual definition of the situation work by downplaying the visual, most of all by not staring at others. It is also unacceptable for a person to actively seek the gaze of others. Naturists may see the decision not to be nude is holding on to the visual, and non-naturists may see beach nudity as a form of exhibitionism. \n\nLegal provisions regarding partial nudity (or toplessness) are analogous to those regarding full nudity, but social tolerance towards toplessness is higher. The law does not require women to cover their breasts in public swimming, or on any beach in Spain. The governments of the municipalities of Galdakao and L'Ametlla del Vallès legalized female toplessness on their public pools in March 2016 and June 2018, respectively. \n\nNaturists were a prominent affinity group among Spanish anarcho-syndicalists . \n\nIn the United Kingdom, the first official nudist club was established in Wickford, Essex, in 1924. According to Michael Farrar, writing for British Naturism , the club adopted the name \"Moonella Group\" from the name of the owner of the ground and called its site The Camp. Moonella, who was still living in 1965 but whose identity remains to be discovered, had inherited a house with land in 1923 and made it available to certain members of the New Gymnosophy Society. This society was founded a few years before by H.C. Booth, M.H. Sorensen and Rex Wellbye under the name of the English Gymnosophical Society. It met for discussions at the Minerva Cafe at 144 High Holborn in London, the headquarters of the Women's Freedom League . Those who were permitted to join the Moonella Group were carefully selected, and the club was run by a leadership of the original members, all of whom had club names to preserve their anonymity. The club closed in 1926 because of construction on adjacent land. \n\nBy 1943, there were a number of \"sun clubs\", and together they formed the British Sun Bathers Association, or BSBA. In 1954, a group of clubs unhappy with the way the BSBA was being run, split to form the Federation of British Sun Clubs, or FBSC. In 1961, the BSBA Annual Conference agreed that the term nudist was inappropriate and should be discarded in favour of naturist. The two organisations rivalled each other before eventually coming together again in 1964 as the Central Council for British Naturism, or CCBN. This organisational structure has remained much the same but as of 2011 [update] it is called British Naturism or BN. \n\nThe first official nude beach was opened at Fairlight Glen in Covehurst Bay near Hastings in 1978 (not to be confused with Fairlight Cove, which is 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) to the east), followed later by the beaches at Brighton and Fraisthorpe. Bridlington opened in April 1980. \n\nAustralia's first naturist club was founded in Sydney in 1931 by the French-born anarchist and pacifist Kleber Claux . In 1975, the southern half of Maslin Beach , south of Adelaide, was declared Australia's first official nude beach. The beach is almost 3 kilometres (1.9 miles) long, so the area reserved for nude bathing is away from other beach users.\n\nNudist clubs (called sun clubs ) were established in Dunedin and Auckland in early 1938; the Auckland Sun Group went into recess shortly afterwards due to the outbreak of World War II. In 1958 the allied nudist clubs of New Zealand established the New Zealand Sunbathing Association, later renamed the New Zealand Naturist Federation. The Federation includes 17 affiliated clubs with a total membership (in 2012) of 1,600 people. In 2016 the Federation, in conjunction with Tourism New Zealand , hosted the World Congress of the International Naturist Federation at the Wellington Naturist Club , marking the second time the Congress had ever been held in the Southern Hemisphere. \n\nOutside formal naturist organizations, social nudity is practised in a variety of contexts in New Zealand culture. It is a feature of many summer music festivals, including Convergence, Kiwiburn , Luminate, Rhythm & Vines , and Splore , in a tradition going back to Nambassa in the late 1970s. It is also associated with the culture of rugby , most prominently in the nude rugby match held in Dunedin each winter from 2002 to 2014 (and sporadically thereafter) as pre-match entertainment for the first professional rugby game of the season, and in the mock public holiday \"National Nude Day\", an event in which viewers of the talk show SportsCafe were invited – chiefly by former rugby player Marc Ellis , the show's most irrepressibly comic presenter – to send in photos and video of themselves performing daily activities in the nude. \n\nWhile a large proportion of New Zealanders are tolerant of nudity, especially on beaches, there remains a contingent who consider it obscene. Naturists who engage in casual public nudity, even in places where this is lawful, risk being reported to police by disapproving people. Legally, nudity is permissible on any beach where it is \"known to occur\", in consequence of which New Zealand has no official nude beaches. The indecent exposure provision of the Summary Offences Act is, in practice, reserved for cases of public sexual gratification, but public nudity may still be prosecuted under the \"offensive behaviour\" provision. \n\nIn Canada, individuals around the country became interested in nudism, skinny-dipping , and physical culture in the early part of the 20th century. Sunbathing & Health , a magazine targeted toward Canadian naturists and which occasionally carried local news, began publication after 1940. There were scattered groups of naturists in several cities during the 1930s and 1940s, and some of these groups attracted enough interest to form clubs on private land. The most significant clubs were the Van Tan Club, formed in 1939, which is still operating in North Vancouver, BC, and the Sun Air Club, in Ontario.\n\nCanadians who served in the military during the Second World War met like-minded souls from across the country, and often visited clubs while in Europe. They were a ready pool of recruits for post-war organizers. A few years later, the wave of post-war immigration brought many Europeans with their own extensive experience, and they not only swelled the ranks of membership, but often formed their own clubs, helping to expand nudism from coast to coast. \n\nMost clubs eventually united in the Canadian Sunbathing Association, which affiliated with the American Sunbathing Association in 1954. Several disagreements between eastern and western members of the CSA resulted in its division into the Western Canadian Sunbathing Association (WCSA) and the Eastern Canadian Sunbathing Association (ECSA) in 1960. The ECSA endured much in-fighting over the next fifteen years, which led to its official demise in 1978. The WCSA changed its name to the American Association for Nude Recreation – Western Canadian Region, a region of the American Association for Nude Recreation (AANR), which itself was formerly known as the ASA. \n\nIn 1977 the Fédération québécoise de naturisme (FQN) was founded in Quebec by Michel Vaïs, who had experienced European naturism at Montalivet. In 1985 the Federation of Canadian Naturists (FCN) was formed with the support of the FQN. In 1988 the FQN and FCN formed the FQN-FCN Union as the official Canadian representative in the International Naturist Federation. \n\nNaturism was a major component of the Cuban anarchist movement, alongside anarchist communism and anarcho-syndicalism , as an alternative health and lifestyle movement. Adrián del Valle in particular advocated for the emancipatory\" function of naturism in a society. \n\nFederación Nudista de México is a members organization with both individual and organization members. It promotes social nudity in Mexico, and it is recognized by the International Naturist Federation as the official national naturist organization in that country.\n\nAs of 2016 [update] , Playa Zipolite is Mexico's first and only legal public nude beach. A free beach and unofficially nudist for more than 50 years, this beach is reputed to be the best place for nudism in the country. The numerous nude sunbathers, and the long tradition, make it safe for nudism and naturism. Annually since 2016, on the first weekend of February, Zipolite has hosted Festival Nudista Zipolite that in 2019 attracted 7,000–8,000 visitors. \n\nKurt Barthel founded the American League for Physical Culture in 1929 and organized the first nudist event. In about 1930 they organized the American Gymnosophical Association . Barthel founded America's first official nudist camp, Sky Farm in New Jersey, in May, 1932. Around 1932, the AGA established the Rock Lodge Club as a nudist facility in Stockholm, New Jersey and Ilsley Boone , a Dutch Reformed minister, formed the Christian naturism movement. Naturism began to expand nationwide. Nudism venues were alcohol-free until 1970. \n\nThe American Association for Nude Recreation (AANR) is the national naturist organization. Arnd Krüger compared nudists in Germany and the United States and came to the conclusion that in Germany the racial aspects ( Zuchtwahl ) were important for the breakthrough (e.g. the Commanding General of the Army served as patron for nudists events), while in the U.S. nudism was far more commercial and had thus more difficulties. \n\nIn 2008, Florida Young Naturists held its first Naked Bash, which has been repeated multiple times per year and has grown into one of the larger young naturist gatherings in the world. \n\nIn 2009, a campaign to promote nudism in the United States occurred with an effort by the AANR to record the largest simultaneous skinny dip at several U.S. clubs and beaches, which occurred on July 11 of that year. \n\nIn 2010, an organization formed called Young Naturists America , which was mostly focused on the younger generation, as well as social issues, such as body image . Young Naturists and Nudists America closed in 2017. \n\nIn the 1970s, nudity on Bali's remote and deserted beaches was common, but with the massive growth of tourism this practice has disappeared. In 2002, nudity was declared illegal on Petitenget Beach, the last beach in Seminyak that tolerated discreet nudity. Individuals began to practice nudity in private villas and resorts. Laki Uma Villa, the first naturist facility to open, was for gay men only. Bali au Naturel, the first adult-only nudist resort for both genders, opened its doors in 2004. It subsequently expanded from 3 to 15 rooms and added two more swimming pools.\n\nIndonesia has an underground naturist community who defy the laws against public nudity. \n\nNudism was introduced in 2012 by The Thailand Naturist Association in Pattaya (Chan Resort), and five more nudist resorts have been created across Thailand: Barefeet Resort in Bangkok, Lemon Tree Resort in Phuket City, Oriental Village in Chiangmai, Phuan Naturist Village in Pattaya, and Peace Blue Naturist Resort in Phuket.\n\nSince 2020 during the worldwide pandemic, Lemon Tree Resort in Phuket, Oriental Village in Chiangmai, and Phuan Naturist Village in Pattaya have closed.\n\nDragonfly Naturist Village in Pattaya (a member of American Association for Nude Recreation) has opened and expanded its property as the largest naturist resort in Thailand.\n\nNaturism is allowed in the official nude beaches of Puerto Escondido, located near Miramar, and Playa Querandí, located in Villa Gesell. Total nudity is permitted in some private naturist resorts.\n\nIn general, public nudity tends to be condemned by the Brazilian authorities, which commonly see it as indecent exposure . However, the country has the highest number of official nude beaches in Latin America, being eight in total, and this number partially is explained by the fact that the Brazilian territory has more than 8,000 kilometres (5,000 mi) of ocean coast. Moreover, there are a few private naturist clubs throughout the country where full nudity is accepted as well. Naturism in Brazil is regulated by the Brazilian Naturism Federation (in Portuguese: Federação Brasileira de Naturismo , abbreviated as FBrN ). [ verification needed ]\n\nThe first nude beach in the country, called Playa Luna , was legalized in 2000, and there are unofficial restricted areas that were created in Playa Luna Norte ( Tarapacá ), Playa Luna Sur (Coliumo), Playa Escondida ( Antofagasta ), Playa Blanca ( Tongoy ) and Pichilemu . \n\nThere are two official nude beaches where the practice of naturism is allowed: Chihuahua, located in the resort of the same name , and La Sirena , located in the resort of Aguas Dulces .\n\nMagazines published by, for or purportedly about naturists can be grouped into the following:\n\nMagazines in the second and, occasionally, third groups feature naturist editorial and advertising. While some naturists argue over which magazines belong in which of these categories, these views may change as publishers and editors change. Many clubs and groups have benefited from magazines which, while not exclusively or even predominantly naturist in character, made naturist information available to many who would not otherwise have been aware of it. The information and advertising provided online, along with the wide availability of free online pornography, has meant the disappearance of old-style \"skin\" magazines presenting significant glamour content masquerading as, or alongside, naturist content. Naturist magazines have to appeal strongly to naturists to succeed; they cannot sit on the fence between naturism and glamour. Some naturists feel that the worthwhile editorial content in some magazines is not a fair balance for the disapproved-of photographic content. \n\nAlthough photographing others when they are nude in a public place may not violate their rights to privacy, individuals retain the personality rights to their own image in many countries. If so, recognizable photographs of any person cannot be published without permission.\n\nSome naturist clubs have been willing to allow filming by the media on their grounds, though content that proved not to be of genuine naturism can end up being parodied by the media. \n\nSome commercial 'naturist' DVDs are dominated by imagery of naked children. Such material can be marketed in ways that appear to appeal directly to pedophile inclinations, and ownership of these DVDs (and their earlier video cassette incarnations) has resulted in successful British prosecutions for possession of indecent images of children. One case was appealed, unsuccessfully, to the European Court of Human Rights . \n\nPhoto shoots, including major high-profile works by Spencer Tunick , are done in public places including beaches. ",
  "Rita Hayworth (born Margarita Carmen Cansino ; October 17, 1918 – May 14, 1987) was an American actress , dancer , and pin-up girl . She achieved fame in the 1940s as one of the top stars of the Golden Age of Hollywood , and appeared in 61 films in total over 37 years. The press coined the term \"The Love Goddess\" to describe Hayworth, after she had become the most glamorous screen idol of the 1940s. She was the top pin-up girl for GIs during World War II . \n\nHayworth is widely known for her performance in the 1946 film noir Gilda , opposite Glenn Ford , in which she played the femme fatale in her first major dramatic role. She is also known for her performances in Only Angels Have Wings (1939), The Strawberry Blonde (1941), Blood and Sand (1941), The Lady from Shanghai (1947), Pal Joey (1957), and Separate Tables (1958). Fred Astaire , with whom she made two films, You'll Never Get Rich (1941) and You Were Never Lovelier (1942), once called her his favorite dance partner. She also starred in the Technicolor musical Cover Girl (1944), with Gene Kelly . She is listed as one of the top 25 female motion picture stars of all time in the American Film Institute 's survey, AFI's 100 Years...100 Stars .\n\nFor her contribution to the motion picture industry, Hayworth received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1645 Vine Street in 1960. \n\nIn 1980, Hayworth was diagnosed with early-onset Alzheimer's disease , which contributed to her death in 1987 at age 68. The public disclosure and discussion of her illness drew attention to Alzheimer's, and helped to increase public and private funding for research into the disease.\n\nHayworth was born as Margarita Carmen Cansino in Brooklyn , New York , the eldest of three children born to dancer parents. Her father, Eduardo Cansino , was a Spaniard of Romani descent, from Castilleja de la Cuesta , a town near Seville , Spain. \n\nHer mother, Volga Hayworth , was an American of Irish and English descent who had performed with the Ziegfeld Follies . : 281 The couple married in 1917. They also had two sons: Eduardo Jr. and Vernon. Her maternal uncle Vinton Hayworth was an actor. \n\nEduardo Cansino wanted his daughter to become a professional dancer, while her mother hoped that she would become an actress. Her paternal grandfather, Antonio Cansino , was renowned as a classical Spanish dancer. He popularized the bolero , and his dancing school in Madrid was world-famous. Antonio Cansino instructed Rita Hayworth in her first dance lesson. Hayworth later recalled, \"From the time I was three and a half... as soon as I could stand on my own feet, I was given dance lessons.\" : 67 She noted \"I didn't like it very much... but I didn't have the courage to tell my father, so I began taking the lessons. Rehearse, rehearse, rehearse, that was my girlhood.\" : 16\n\nShe attended dance classes every day for a few years in a Carnegie Hall complex, where she was taught by her uncle Angel Cansino. Before her fifth birthday she was one of the Four Cansinos featured in the Broadway production of The Greenwich Village Follies at the Winter Garden Theatre . In 1926, at the age of eight, she was featured in La Fiesta , a short film for Warner Bros. \n\nIn 1927, her father took the family to Hollywood . He believed that dancing could be featured in the movies and that his family could be part of it. He established his own dance studio, where he taught such stars as James Cagney and Jean Harlow . : 253\n\nIn 1931, Eduardo Cansino partnered with his 12-year-old daughter to form an act called the Dancing Cansinos. : 14 Her hair was dyed from brown to black to give her a more mature and \"Latin\" appearance. Since under California law Margarita was too young to work in nightclubs and bars, her father took her with him to work across the border in Tijuana , Mexico. In the early 1930s, it was a popular tourist spot for people from Los Angeles . Because she was working, Cansino never graduated from high school, but she completed the ninth grade at Hamilton High in Los Angeles.\n\nCansino took a bit part in the film Cruz Diablo (1934) at age 16, which led to another bit part in the film In Caliente (1935) with the Mexican actress Dolores del Río . She danced with her father in such nightspots as the Foreign and the Caliente clubs. Winfield Sheehan , the head of the Fox Film Corporation , saw her dancing at the Caliente Club and quickly arranged for Hayworth to do a screen test a week later. Impressed by her screen persona, Sheehan signed her to a six-month contract at Fox under the name Rita Cansino, the first of two name changes during her film career. [ citation needed ]\n\nDuring her time at Fox, Hayworth was billed as Rita Cansino and appeared in unremarkable roles, often cast as the exotic foreigner. In late 1934, aged 16, she performed a dance sequence in the Spencer Tracy film Dante's Inferno (1935), and was put under contract in February 1935. : 27 She had her first speaking role as an Argentinian girl in Under the Pampas Moon (1935). : 28–30 She played an Egyptian girl in Charlie Chan in Egypt (1935), and a Russian dancer in Paddy O'Day (1935). Sheehan was grooming her for the lead in the 1936 Technicolor film Ramona , hoping to establish her as Fox Film's new Dolores del Río . : 29–31\n\nBy the end of her six-month contract, Fox had merged into 20th Century Fox , with Darryl F. Zanuck serving as the executive producer. Dismissing Sheehan's interest in her and giving Loretta Young the lead in Ramona , Zanuck did not renew Cansino's contract. : 32–33 Sensing her screen potential, salesman and promoter Edward C. Judson, with whom she would elope in 1937, : 36 got freelance work for her in several small-studio films and a part in the Columbia Pictures feature Meet Nero Wolfe (1936). Studio head Harry Cohn signed her to a seven-year contract and tried her out in small roles. : 34–35\n\nCohn argued that her image was too Mediterranean, which limited her to being stereotyped in \"exotic\" roles that were fewer in number. He was heard to say her last name sounded too Spanish. Judson acted on Cohn's advice: Rita Cansino became Rita Hayworth when she adopted her mother's maiden name, to the consternation of her father. : 36 Therefore, Cohn argued, people were more likely to regard her as a classic \"American\". With Cohn and Judson's encouragement, Hayworth also changed her hair color to ginger red hair and had electrolysis to raise her hairline and broaden the appearance of her forehead. \n\nHayworth appeared in five minor Columbia pictures and three minor independent movies in 1937. The following year, she appeared in five Columbia B movies . In 1939, Cohn pressured director Howard Hawks to use Hayworth for a small, but important, role as a man-trap in the aviation drama Only Angels Have Wings , in which she played opposite Cary Grant and Jean Arthur . \n\nCohn began to build up Hayworth in 1940 in features such as Music in My Heart , The Lady in Question , and Angels Over Broadway . That year, she was first featured in a Life magazine cover story. While on loan to Warner Bros., Hayworth appeared as the second female lead in The Strawberry Blonde (1941), opposite James Cagney. \n\nShe returned in triumph to Columbia Pictures, and was cast in the musical You'll Never Get Rich (1941) opposite Fred Astaire in one of the highest-budgeted films Columbia had ever made. The picture was so successful, the studio produced and released another Astaire-Hayworth picture the following year, You Were Never Lovelier . Astaire's biographer Peter Levinson writes that the dancing combination of Astaire and Hayworth was \"absolute magnetism on the screen\". Although Astaire made 10 films with Ginger Rogers , his other main dancing partner, Hayworth's sensuality surpassed Rogers' cool technical expertise. \"Rita's youthful exuberance meshed perfectly with Fred's maturity and elegance\", says Levinson. \n\nWhen Astaire was asked who his favorite dance partner was, he tried not answering the question, but later admitted it was Hayworth: \"All right, I'll give you a name\", he said. \"But if you ever let it out, I'll swear I lied. It was Rita Hayworth.\" Astaire commented that \"Rita danced with trained perfection and individuality ... She was better when she was 'on' than at rehearsal.\" Biographer Charlie Reinhart describes the effect she had on Astaire's style:\n\nThere was a kind of reserve about Fred. It was charming. It carried over to his dancing. With Hayworth there was no reserve. She was very explosive. And that's why I think they really complemented each other. \n\nIn August 1941, Hayworth was featured in an iconic Life photo in which she posed in a negligee with a black lace bodice. Bob Landry's photo made Hayworth one of the top two pin-up girls of the World War II years; the other was Betty Grable , in a 1943 photograph. For two years, Hayworth's photograph was the most requested pin-up photograph in circulation. In 2002, the satin nightgown Hayworth wore for the photo sold for $26,888. \n\nIn March 1942, Hayworth visited Brazil as a cultural ambassador for the Roosevelt administration's Good Neighbor policy , under the auspices of the Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs . During the 1940s Hayworth also contributed to the OCIAA's cultural diplomacy initiatives in support of Pan-Americanism through her broadcasts to South America on the CBS \"Cadena de las Américas\" radio network. \n\nHayworth had top billing in one of her best-known films, the Technicolor musical Cover Girl , released in 1944. The film established her as Columbia's top star of the 1940s, and it gave her the distinction of being the first of only six women to dance on screen with both Gene Kelly and Fred Astaire. \"I guess the only jewels of my life\", Hayworth said in 1970, \"were the pictures I made with Fred Astaire ... And Cover Girl , too.\" \n\nFor three consecutive years, starting in 1944, Hayworth was named one of the top movie box-office attractions in the world. She was adept in ballet , tap , ballroom , and Spanish routines. Cohn continued to showcase Hayworth's dance talents. Columbia featured her in the Technicolor films Tonight and Every Night (1945) with Lee Bowman and Down to Earth (1947) with Larry Parks . [ citation needed ]\n\nHer sexy, glamorous appeal was most noted in Charles Vidor 's film noir Gilda (1946) with Glenn Ford , which caused censors some consternation. The role, in which Hayworth wore black satin and performed a legendary one-glove striptease, \"Put The Blame On Mame\", made her into a cultural icon as a femme fatale . \n\nWhile Gilda was in release, it was widely reported that an atomic bomb that was scheduled to be tested at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific Ocean's Marshall Islands would bear an image of Hayworth, a reference to her bombshell status. Although the gesture was undoubtedly meant as a compliment, Hayworth was deeply offended. Orson Welles, then married to Hayworth, recalled her anger in an interview with biographer Barbara Leaming : \"Rita used to fly into terrible rages all the time, but the angriest was when she found out that they'd put her on the atom bomb. Rita almost went insane, she was so angry.... She wanted to go to Washington to hold a press conference, but Harry Cohn wouldn't let her because it would be unpatriotic.\" Welles tried to persuade Hayworth that the whole business was not a publicity stunt on Cohn's part, that it was simply homage to her from the flight crew. : 129–130\n\nOn the June 30, 1946, broadcast of Orson Welles Commentaries , Welles said of the imminent test, \"I want my daughter to be able to tell her daughter that grandmother's picture was on the last atom bomb ever to explode.\" \n\nThe fourth atomic bomb ever to be detonated was decorated with a photograph of Hayworth cut from the June 1946 issue of Esquire magazine. Above it was stenciled the device's nickname, \"Gilda\" - the name of the film in which she was starring at the time - in two-inch black letters. \n\nHayworth's performance in Welles' 1947 film The Lady from Shanghai was critically acclaimed. The film's failure at the box office was attributed in part to Hayworth's famous red hair being cut short and bleached platinum blonde for the role. Cohn had not been consulted and was furious that Hayworth's image was changed. : 221\n\nAlso in 1947, Hayworth was featured in a Life cover story by Winthrop Sargeant that resulted in her being nicknamed \"The Love Goddess\". The term was adopted and used later as the title of a biopic and of a biography about her. In a 1980s interview, Hayworth said, \"Everybody else does nude scenes, but I don't. I never made nude movies. I didn't have to do that. I danced. I was provocative, I guess, in some things. But I was not completely exposed.\" : 234\n\nHer next film, The Loves of Carmen (1948) with Glenn Ford, was the first film co-produced by Columbia and Hayworth's production company, The Beckworth Corporation (named for Rebecca, her daughter with Welles). It was Columbia's biggest moneymaker that year. She received a percentage of the profits from this and all her subsequent films until 1954, when she dissolved Beckworth to pay off debts. \n\nIn 1948, at the height of her fame, Hayworth traveled to Cannes and was introduced to Prince Aly Khan . They began a year-long courtship, and were married on May 27, 1949. Hayworth left Hollywood and sailed for France, breaking her contract with Columbia.\n\nBecause Hayworth was already one of the best-known celebrities in the world, the courtship and the wedding received enormous press coverage around the world. Because she was still legally married to second husband Orson Welles during the early days of her courtship with the prince, Hayworth also received some negative backlash, causing some American fans to boycott her pictures. On December 28, 1949, Hayworth gave birth to the couple's only child, Princess Yasmin Aga Khan .\n\nThough Hayworth was anxious to start a new life abroad, away from Hollywood, Aly Khan's flamboyant lifestyle and duties proved too difficult for Hayworth. She struggled to fit in with his friends, and found it difficult to learn French. Aly Khan was also known in circles as a playboy, and it was suspected that he had been unfaithful to Hayworth during the marriage.\n\nIn 1951, Hayworth set sail with her two daughters for New York. Although the couple did reconcile for a short time, they divorced in 1953.\n\nAfter the collapse of her marriage to Khan, Rita Hayworth returned to Hollywood to star in her \"comeback\" picture, Affair in Trinidad (1952) which again paired her with Glenn Ford. Director Vincent Sherman recalled that Hayworth seemed \"rather frightened at the approach of doing another picture\". She continued to clash with Columbia boss Harry Cohn and was placed on suspension during filming. Nevertheless, the picture was highly publicized. The picture ended up grossing $1 million more than her previous blockbuster, Gilda .\n\nShe continued to star in a string of successful pictures. In 1953, she had two films released: Salome with Charles Laughton and Stewart Granger , and Miss Sadie Thompson with José Ferrer and Aldo Ray . She was off the big screen for another four years, mainly because of a tumultuous marriage to the singer Dick Haymes . During her marriage to Haymes, she was involved in much negative publicity, which significantly lessened her appeal [ citation needed ] . By the time she returned to the screen for Fire Down Below (1957) with Robert Mitchum and Jack Lemmon , Kim Novak had become Columbia's top female star. Her last musical was Pal Joey (1957) with Frank Sinatra and Novak (Hayworth had top billing in both pictures but actually played a supporting role in Pal Joey ). Hayworth then left Columbia for good.\n\nShe received good reviews for her performances in Separate Tables (1958), with Burt Lancaster and David Niven , They Came to Cordura (1959) with Gary Cooper and The Story on Page One (1960). She was meant to be in Summer of the Seventeenth Doll with Lancaster but both withdrew after the original play failed on Broadway. She continued working throughout the 1960s. In 1962, her planned Broadway debut in Step on a Crack was cancelled for undisclosed health reasons. In 1964 Circus World was released, in which John Wayne was her co-star and for which she received a Golden Globe nomination as Best Actress in a dramatic role. The Money Trap (1965) paired her, for the last time, with good friend Glenn Ford. She continued to act in films until the early 1970s. She made comedic television appearances on Laugh In and The Carol Burnett Show in the 1970s. Her last film was The Wrath of God (1972), a western. [ citation needed ]\n\nHayworth had a strained relationship with Columbia Pictures for many years. In 1943, she was suspended without pay for nine weeks because she refused to appear in Once Upon a Time . During this period in Hollywood, contract players could not choose their films; they were on salary rather than receiving a fixed amount per picture.\n\nIn 1947, Hayworth's new contract with Columbia provided a salary of $250,000 plus 50% of films' profits. In 1951, Columbia alleged it had $800,000 invested in properties for her, including the film that she had walked out on that year. Hayworth left Hollywood to marry Prince Aly Khan and was suspended for failing to report to work on the film Affair in Trinidad . In 1952, Hayworth refused to report for work because she objected to the script. She said,\n\nI was in Switzerland when they sent me the script for Affair in Trinidad and I threw it across the room. But I did the picture, and Pal Joey , too. I came back to Columbia because I wanted to work and first, see, I had to finish that goddamn contract, which is how Harry Cohn owned me!\" \n\nIn 1955, she sued Columbia Pictures to be released from her contract, but asked for her $150,000 salary, alleging that the filming failed to start on Joseph and His Brethren (1961) when agreed. The film was later filmed in 1961 by a foreign company as The Story of Joseph and His Brethren (film). Cohn had a reputation as a taskmaster, but he had his own criticisms of Hayworth. He had invested heavily in her before she began an affair with the married Aly Khan, and it could have caused a backlash against her career and Columbia's success. For instance, an article in the British periodical The People called for a boycott of Hayworth's films:\n\nHollywood must be told its already tarnished reputation will sink to rock bottom if it restores this reckless woman to a place among its stars.\" \n\nCohn expressed his frustration in a 1957 interview with Time magazine:\n\nHayworth might be worth ten million dollars today easily! She owned 25% of the profits with her own company and had hit after hit and she had to get married and had to get out of the business and took a suspension because she fell in love again! In five years, at two pictures a year, at 25%! Think of what she could have made! But she didn't make pictures! She took two or three suspensions! She got mixed up with different characters! Unpredictable!\" : 163\n\nYears after her film career had ended and long after Cohn had died, Hayworth still resented her treatment by both him and Columbia. She spoke bluntly in a 1968 interview:\n\nI used to have to punch a time clock at Columbia. Every day of my life. That's what it was like. I was under exclusive contract, like they owned me ... I think he had my dressing room bugged ... He was very possessive of me as a person, he didn't want me to go out with anybody, have any friends. No one can live that way. So I fought him ... You want to know what I think of Harry Cohn? He was a monster. \n\nLater on, in 1972 she said :\n\nHarry Cohn thought of me as one of the people he could exploit, and make a lot of money... And I did make a lot of money for him, but not much for me. \n\nHayworth resented the fact that the studio had failed to train her to sing or even to encourage her to learn how to sing. : 103 Although she appeared to sing in many of her films, she was usually dubbed. Because the public did not know her secret, she was embarrassed to be asked to sing by troops at USO shows. : 124\n\n\"I wanted to study singing\", Hayworth complained, \"but Harry Cohn kept saying, 'Who needs it?' and the studio wouldn't pay for it. They had me so intimidated that I couldn't have done it anyway. They always said, 'Oh, no, we can't let you do it. There's no time for that; it has to be done right now!' I was under contract, and that was it.\" : 104\n\nHayworth was a top glamour girl in the 1940s, a pin-up girl for military servicemen and a beauty icon for women. At 5 ft 6 in (1.68 m) and 120 lb (54 kg), she was tall enough to be a concern for dancing partners such as Fred Astaire. She reportedly changed her hair color eight times in eight movies. \n\nIn 1949, Hayworth's lips were voted best in the world by the Artists League of America. She had a modeling contract with Max Factor to promote its Tru-Color lipsticks and Pan-Stik make-up. [ citation needed ]\n\nHayworth confided to Orson Welles that her father began to sexually abuse her as a child when they were touring together as the Dancing Cansinos. Her biographer, Barbara Leaming , wrote that her mother may have been the only person to know; she slept in the same bed as her daughter to try to protect her. Leaming wrote that the abuse experienced by Hayworth as a young girl contributed to her difficulty in relationships as an adult. \n\nIn 1941, Hayworth said she was the antithesis of the characters she played: \"I naturally am very shy ... and I suffer from an inferiority complex .\" Her provocative role in Gilda , in particular, was responsible for people expecting her to be what she was not. Hayworth once said, with some bitterness, \"Men go to bed with Gilda, but wake up with me.\" : 122 She said, \"Basically, I am a good, gentle person, but I am attracted to mean personalities.\" \n\nHayworth's two younger brothers, Eduardo Cansino Jr. and Vernon Cansino, both served in World War II . Vernon left the United States Army in 1946 with several medals, including the Purple Heart , and later married Susan Vail, a dancer. Eduardo Jr. followed Hayworth into acting; he was also under contract with Columbia Pictures. In 1950, he made his screen debut in The Great Adventures of Captain Kidd . \n\nHayworth married and divorced five times in twenty-four years. She had affairs with several of her leading men, most notably with Victor Mature in 1942, during the filming of My Gal Sal . \n\nShe had two daughters and two grandsons, one by each daughter. Her older daughter, Rebecca Welles, (1944-2004) had a son, Marc McKerrow, whom she gave birth to in 1966, and put up for adoption at birth. Marc had three children, and died at age 44 as a result of complications from a nocturnal seizure related to a serious car accident that he had when he was 21 years old. Marc is featured in the 2008 documentary Prodigal Sons . Hayworth's younger daughter, Yasmin Aga Khan , had one son, Andrew Ali Aga Khan Embiricos, who died unmarried at age 25. \n\nIn 1936, at age 18, Hayworth married Edward C. Judson, an oilman turned promoter who was more than twice her age. They married in Las Vegas. Judson, who helped launch her acting career, was a shrewd businessman, but domineering. \"He helped me with my career\", Hayworth conceded after they divorced, adding \"and helped himself to my money.\" She alleged that Judson compelled her to transfer a considerable amount of her property to him, and she promised to pay him $12,000 under threats that he would do her \"great bodily harm\". \n\nHayworth filed for divorce from him on February 24, 1942, with a complaint of cruelty. She noted to the press that his work took him to Oklahoma and Texas while she lived and worked in Hollywood. Judson was as old as her father, who was enraged by the marriage, which caused a rift between Hayworth and her parents until the divorce. Judson had failed to tell Hayworth before they married that he had previously been married twice. : 62 When she left him, she had no money; she asked her friend Hermes Pan if she could eat at his home. [ citation needed ]\n\nHayworth married Orson Welles on September 7, 1943, during the run of The Mercury Wonder Show . None of her colleagues knew about the planned wedding (before a judge) until she announced it the day before. For the civil ceremony, she wore a beige suit, a ruffled white blouse, and a veil. A few hours after they got married, they returned to work at the studio. They had a daughter, Rebecca, who was born on December 17, 1944, and died at the age of 59 on October 17, 2004. They struggled in their marriage, with Hayworth saying that Welles did not want to be tied down:\n\nDuring the entire period of our marriage, he showed no interest in establishing a home. When I suggested purchasing a home, he told me he didn't want the responsibility. Mr. Welles told me he never should have married in the first place; that it interfered with his freedom in his way of life. \n\nOn November 10, 1947, she was granted a divorce that became final the following year. [ citation needed ] The divorce was civil and they remained friendly afterwards. \n\nHayworth also had an intermittent, long-term relationship with Glenn Ford , which started during the filming of Gilda in 1945, and continued through each other's numerous marriages. Their relationship is documented in the 2011 biography Glenn Ford: A Life by Ford's son, Peter Ford . Peter revealed in his book that Hayworth became pregnant during the filming of The Loves of Carmen and traveled to France to get an abortion. Ford later moved next door to her in Beverly Hills in 1960, and they continued their relationship until the early 1980s. \n\nIn 1948, Hayworth left her film career to marry Prince Aly Khan, a son of Sultan Mohammed Shah, Aga Khan III , the leader of the Ismaili community of Shia Islam. They were married on May 27, 1949.\n\nAly Khan and his family were heavily involved in horse racing , owning and racing horses. Hayworth had no interest in the sport, but became a member of the Del Mar Thoroughbred Club anyway. Her filly, Double Rose, won several races in France and finished second in the 1949 Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe . \n\nIn 1951, while still married to Hayworth, Khan was spotted dancing with the actress Joan Fontaine in the nightclub where he and Hayworth had met. Hayworth threatened to divorce him in Reno, Nevada . In early May, Hayworth moved to Nevada to establish legal residence to qualify for a divorce. She stayed at Lake Tahoe with their daughter, saying there was a threat the child would be kidnapped. Hayworth filed for divorce from Khan on September 2, 1951, on the grounds of \"extreme cruelty, entirely mental in nature\". \n\nHayworth once said she might convert to Islam, but did not. During the custody fight over their daughter, Princess Yasmin Aga Khan , born ( 1949-12-28 ) December 28, 1949, the prince said he wanted her to be raised as a Muslim ; Hayworth wanted the child to be raised as a Christian. Hayworth rejected his offer of $1 million if she would rear Yasmin as a Muslim from age seven and allow her to go to Europe to visit with him for two or three months each year, stating:\n\nNothing will make me give up Yasmin's chance to live here in America among our precious freedoms and habits. While I respect the Moslem faith, and all other faiths, it is my earnest wish that my daughter be raised as a normal, healthy American girl in the Christian faith. There isn't any amount of money in the entire world for which it is worth sacrificing this child's privilege of living as a normal Christian girl here in the United States. There just isn't anything else in the world that can compare with her sacred chance to do that. And I'm going to give it to Yasmin regardless of what it costs. \n\nIn January 1953, Hayworth was granted a divorce from Aly Khan on the grounds of extreme mental cruelty. Her daughter Yasmin, only three years old, played about the court while the case was being heard, finally climbing on to the judge's lap. \n\nWhen Hayworth and Dick Haymes first met, he was still married and his singing career was waning. Haymes was desperate for money because two of his former wives were taking legal action against him for unpaid child support. His financial problems were so bad that when he tried to return to California, he was arrested. \n\nOn July 7, 1954, his ex-wife Nora Eddington got a bench warrant for his arrest, because he owed her $3,800 in alimony. Less than a week earlier, his other ex-wife, Joanne Dru , also got a bench warrant because she said he owed $4,800 in child support payments for their three children. Hayworth ended up paying most of Haymes's debts. [ citation needed ]\n\nHaymes was born in Argentina and did not have solid proof of American citizenship. Not long after he met Hayworth, U.S. officials initiated proceedings to have him deported to Argentina for being an illegal alien. He hoped Hayworth could influence the government and keep him in the United States. When she assumed responsibility for his citizenship, a bond was formed that led to marriage. The two were married on September 24, 1953, at the Sands Hotel, Las Vegas , and their wedding procession went through the casino.\n\nFrom the start of their marriage, Haymes was deeply in debt to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). When Hayworth took time off from attending his comeback performances in Philadelphia , audiences sharply declined. Haymes's $5,000 weekly salary was attached by the IRS to pay a $100,000 bill, and he was unable to pay his pianist. Haymes's ex-wives demanded money while Hayworth publicly bemoaned her own lack of alimony from Aly Khan. At one point, the couple was effectively imprisoned in a hotel room for 24 hours in Manhattan at the Hotel Madison while sheriff's deputies waited outside, threatening to arrest Haymes for outstanding debts.\n\nAt the same time, Hayworth was fighting a severe custody battle with Khan, during which she reported death threats against their children. While living in New York, Hayworth sent the children to live with their nanny in Westchester County . They were found and photographed by a reporter from Confidential magazine. [ citation needed ]\n\nAfter a tumultuous two years together, Haymes struck Hayworth in the face in 1955 in public at the Cocoanut Grove nightclub in Los Angeles. Hayworth packed her bags, walked out, and never returned. The assault and crisis shook her, and her doctor ordered her to remain in bed for several days. \n\nHayworth was short of money after her marriage to Haymes. She had failed to gain child support from Aly Khan. She sued Orson Welles for back payment of child support, which she claimed had never been paid. This effort was unsuccessful and added to her stress. [ citation needed ]\n\nHayworth began a relationship with film producer James Hill , whom she went on to marry on February 2, 1958. He put her in one of her last major films, Separate Tables . This film was popular and highly praised, although The Harvard Lampoon named her the worst actress of 1958 for her performance. On September 1, 1961, Hayworth filed for divorce, alleging extreme mental cruelty. Hill later wrote Rita Hayworth: A Memoir , in which he suggested that their marriage collapsed because he wanted Hayworth to continue making movies, while she wanted them both to retire from Hollywood. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn his autobiography, Charlton Heston wrote about Hayworth's brief marriage to Hill. One night, Heston and his wife Lydia joined the couple for dinner at a restaurant in Spain with the director George Marshall and the actor Rex Harrison , Hayworth's co-star in The Happy Thieves . Heston wrote that the occasion \"turned into the single most embarrassing evening of my life\", describing how Hill heaped \"obscene abuse\" on Hayworth until she was \"reduced to a helpless flood of tears, her face buried in her hands\". Heston wrote that the others sat stunned, witnesses to a \"marital massacre\", and, though he was \"strongly tempted to slug him\" (Hill), he left with his wife Lydia after she stood up, almost in tears. Heston wrote, \"I'm ashamed of walking away from Miss Hayworth's humiliation. I never saw her again.\" \n\nOrson Welles noted Hayworth's problem with alcohol during their marriage, but he never believed that her problem was alcoholism . \"It certainly imitated alcoholism in every superficial way\", he recalled in 1983. \"She'd fly into these rages, never at me, never once, always at Harry Cohn or her father or her mother or her brother. She would break all the furniture and she'd get in a car and I'd have to get in the car and try to control her. She'd drive up in the hills suicidally. Terrible, terrible nights. And I just saw this lovely girl destroying herself. I admire Yasmin so much.\" : 129–130\n\nYasmin Aga Khan spoke of her mother's long struggle with alcohol:\n\nI remember as a child that she had a drinking problem. She had difficulty coping with the ups and downs of the business ... As a child, I thought, 'She has a drinking problem, and she's an alcoholic.' That was very clear, and I thought, 'Well, there's not much I can do. I can just, sort of, stand by and watch.' It's very difficult, seeing your mother, going through her emotional problems and drinking and then behaving in that manner ... Her condition became quite bad. It worsened and she did have an alcoholic breakdown and landed in the hospital. \n\nIn 1972, the 54-year-old Hayworth wanted to retire from acting, but she needed money. At the suggestion of Robert Mitchum , she agreed to film The Wrath of God . The experience exposed her poor health and her worsening mental state. Because she could not remember her lines, her scenes were shot one line at a time. : 337–338 In November, she agreed to complete one more movie, the British film Tales That Witness Madness , : 343 but because of her worsening health, she left the set and returned to the United States. She never returned to acting. \n\nIn March 1974, both of her brothers died within a week of each other, which caused her great sadness and led to heavy drinking. In January 1976, at London 's Heathrow Airport , Hayworth was removed from a TWA flight after having an angry outburst while traveling with her agent. The event attracted much negative publicity; a photograph where she looked disheveled was published in newspapers the next day. Hayworth's alcoholism hid symptoms of what was eventually understood to be Alzheimer's disease . \n\nYasmin Aga Khan spoke of her mother's disease:\n\nIt was the outbursts. She'd fly into a rage. I can't tell you. I thought it was alcoholism – alcoholic dementia. We all thought that. The papers picked that up, of course. You can't imagine the relief just in getting a diagnosis. We had a name at last, Alzheimer's! Of course, that didn't really come until the last seven or eight years. She wasn't diagnosed as having Alzheimer's until 1980. There were two decades of hell before that. \n\nBiographer Barbara Leaming wrote that Hayworth aged prematurely because of her addiction to alcohol and also because of the many stresses in her life. \"Despite the artfully applied make-up and shoulder-length red hair, there was no concealing the ravages of drink and stress\", she wrote of Hayworth's arrival in New York in May 1956 in order to begin work on Fire Down Below , her first film in three years. \"Deep lines had crept around her eyes and mouth, and she appeared worn, exhausted – older than her thirty-eight years.\" : 322\n\nAlzheimer's disease had been largely forgotten by the medical community since its discovery in 1906. Medical historian Barron H. Lerner wrote that when Hayworth's diagnosis was made public in 1981, she became \"the first public face of Alzheimer's, helping to ensure that future patients did not go undiagnosed ... Unbeknownst to her, Hayworth helped to destigmatize a condition that can still embarrass victims and their families.\" \n\nIn July 1981, Hayworth's health had deteriorated to the point that a judge in Los Angeles Superior Court ruled that she should be placed under the care of her daughter, Princess Yasmin Aga Khan of New York City. Hayworth lived in an apartment at The San Remo on Central Park West adjoining that of her daughter, who arranged for her mother's care during her final years. : 359 When asked how her mother was doing, Yasmin replied, \"She's still beautiful. But it's a shell.\"\n\nIn 1983, Rebecca Welles arranged to see her mother for the first time in seven years. Speaking to his lifelong friend Roger Hill, Orson Welles expressed his concern about the visit's effect on his daughter. \"Rita barely knows me now,\" Welles said. He recalled seeing Hayworth three years before at an event that the Reagans held for Frank Sinatra . \"When it was over, I came over to her table, and I saw that she was very beautiful, very reposed looking, and didn't know me at first. After about four minutes of speaking, I could see that she realized who I was, and she began to cry quietly.\" : 129\n\nIn an interview that he gave the evening before his death in 1985, Welles called Hayworth \"one of the dearest and sweetest women that ever lived\". \n\nHayworth was a lifelong Democrat who was an active member of the Hollywood Democratic Committee and was active in the campaign of Franklin D. Roosevelt during the 1944 presidential election . In 1968, Hayworth was part of a Hollywood committee that endorsed Robert F. Kennedy 's presidential campaign . \n\nHayworth was a Catholic whose marriage to Prince Aly Khan was deemed illicit by Pope Pius XII . \n\nHayworth lapsed into a semicoma in February 1987. She died at age 68, from complications associated with Alzheimer's disease, on May 14, 1987, at her home in Manhattan. President Ronald Reagan , who was one of Hayworth's contemporaries in Hollywood (and who went on to also suffer from Alzheimer's in his final years), issued a statement:\n\nRita Hayworth was one of our country's most beloved stars. Glamorous and talented, she gave us many wonderful moments on stage and screen and delighted audiences from the time she was a young girl. In her later years, Rita became known for her struggle with Alzheimer's disease. Her courage and candor, and that of her family, were a great public service in bringing worldwide attention to a disease which we all hope will soon be cured. Nancy and I are saddened by Rita's death. She was a friend who we will miss. We extend our deep sympathy to her family. \n\nA funeral service was held on May 18, 1987, at the Church of the Good Shepherd . Pallbearers included actors Ricardo Montalbán , Glenn Ford, Cesar Romero , Anthony Franciosa , choreographer Hermes Pan , and a family friend, Phillip Luchenbill. She was interred at Holy Cross Cemetery, Culver City . Her headstone includes Yasmin's sentiment: \"To yesterday's companionship and tomorrow's reunion.\"\n\nHayworth received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama for her performance in Circus World (1964).\n\nIn 1978, at the Shoreham Hotel in Washington, D. C., Hayworth was presented with the inaugural National Screen Heritage Award of the National Film Society, : xvi a group that published American Classic Screen magazine (1976–1984). : xv, xxi\n\nIn 1999, Hayworth was acknowledged as one of the top-25 greatest female stars of Classic Hollywood cinema in the American Film Institute 's survey, AFI's 100 Years...100 Stars . \n\nThe public disclosure and discussion of Hayworth's illness drew international attention to Alzheimer's disease, which was little known at the time, and it helped to greatly increase federal funding for Alzheimer's research. \n\nThe Rita Hayworth Gala, a benefit for the Alzheimer's Association , is held annually in Chicago and New York City. The program was founded in 1985 by Princess Yasmin Aga Khan, in honor of her mother. She is the hostess for the events and is a major sponsor of Alzheimer's disease charities and awareness programs. As of August 2017 [update] , a total of more than $72 million had been raised through events in Chicago, New York, and Palm Beach, Florida . \n\nOn October 17, 2016, a press release from the Springer Associates Public Relations Agency announced that Rita Hayworth's former manager and friend, Budd Burton Moss, initiated a campaign to solicit the United States Postal Service to issue a commemorative stamp featuring Hayworth. Springer Associates also announced that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences would be lobbied in hopes of having an honorary Academy Award issued in memory of Hayworth. The press release added that Hayworth's daughter, Princess Yasmin Aga Khan, the Alzheimer's Association of Greater Los Angeles, and numerous prominent personalities of stage and screen were supporting the Moss campaign. The press release stated the target date for fulfillment of the stamp and Academy Award to be on October 17, 2018, the centennial of Hayworth's birth.\n\nThe film I Remember Better When I Paint (2009) describes how Hayworth took up painting while struggling with Alzheimer's. In 1983, Lynda Carter , who was of a similar Irish and Hispanic ancestry, played and danced as Hayworth in a TV biopic Rita Hayworth: The Love Goddess .\n\nIn the Baptiste episode \"Shell\", Baptiste talks to Kim about Hayworth in an attempt to gain information from her about Natalie after noticing that she has several DVDs of Hayworth's films; the Dream Room has a poster of Gilda . \n\nHayworth's name can be heard in the Madonna hit from 1990, \" Vogue \", (\"Rita Hayworth gave good face\") among other artists from classical Hollywood cinema . Her name is also mentioned in Tom Waits 's song \"Invitation to the Blues\", from his 1976 album Small Change .\n\nIn the Sicilian scenes of the film The Godfather , the bodyguard of Michael Corleone is heard shouting the name \"Rita Hayworth\" to GI's passing by in jeeps.\n\nHayworth is the main topic of the song, \"Take, Take, Take\" by the White Stripes and also referenced in \"White Moon\"; both from their Get Behind Me Satan album, released in 2005. In a 2005 interview with Rolling Stone , Jack White said, \"Rita Hayworth became an all-encompassing metaphor for everything I was thinking about while making the album.\" \n\nThe film The Shawshank Redemption was adapted from a Stephen King novella, \" Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption \", from his 1982 collection Different Seasons . A succession of posters, starting with one of Rita Hayworth, hides a hole in a jail cell wall in the novella. In the film, a poster of Rita Hayworth was used for the first third of the film, then changed to a poster of Marilyn Monroe for the middle third, then Raquel Welch for the last third. The film also includes a scene where the prison movie night shows Rita Hayworth's film Gilda .\n\nIn the film Mulholland Drive , an amnesiac character who cannot remember her real name gives herself the name Rita. She sees the name on a poster for Hayworth’s film Gilda that hangs in the room where she’s standing at the time she’s first asked her name.",
  "Prairie School is a late 19th and early 20th-century architectural style, most common in the Midwestern United States . The style is usually marked by horizontal lines, flat or hipped roofs with broad overhanging eaves , windows grouped in horizontal bands, integration with the landscape, solid construction, craftsmanship, and discipline in the use of ornament. Horizontal lines were thought to evoke and relate to the wide, flat, treeless expanses of America's native prairie landscape.\n\nThe Prairie School was an attempt at developing an indigenous North American style of architecture in sympathy with the ideals and design aesthetics of the Arts and Crafts Movement , with which it shared an embrace of handcrafting and craftsman guilds as an antidote to the dehumanizing effects of mass production.\n\nThe Prairie School developed in sympathy with the ideals and design aesthetics of the Arts and Crafts Movement begun in the late 19th century in England by John Ruskin , William Morris , and others. Along with the kindred American Craftsman movement it shared an embrace of handcrafting and craftsman guilds as a reaction against the new assembly line mass production manufacturing techniques, which was felt to create inferior products and dehumanize workers.\n\nThe Prairie School was also an attempt at developing an indigenous North American style of architecture that did not share design elements and aesthetic vocabulary with earlier styles of European classical architecture. Many talented and ambitious young architects had been attracted by building opportunities stemming from the Great Chicago Fire of 1871. The World's Columbian Exposition (Chicago World's Fair) of 1893 was supposed to be a heralding of the city of Chicago's rebirth. But many of the young Midwestern architects of what would become the Prairie School were offended by the Greek and Roman classicism of nearly every building erected for the fair. In reaction, they sought to create new work in and around Chicago that would display a uniquely modern and authentically American style, which came to be called Prairie.\n\nThe designation Prairie is due to the dominant horizontality of the majority of Prairie style buildings, which echoes the wide, flat, treeless expanses of the mid-Western United States. The most famous proponent of the style, Frank Lloyd Wright , promoted an idea of \" organic architecture \" (p. 53), the primary tenet of which was that a structure should look as if it naturally grew from the site. In the words of Wright, buildings that appeared as if they were \"married to the ground.\" (p. 53) Wright also felt that a horizontal orientation was a distinctly American design motif, in that the younger country had much more open, undeveloped land than found in most older and highly urbanized European nations.\n\nThe Prairie School is mostly associated with a generation of architects employed or influenced by Frank Lloyd Wright or Louis Sullivan , though usually not including Sullivan himself. While the style originated in Chicago, some Prairie School architects spread its influence well beyond the Midwest. A partial list of Prairie School architects includes:\n\nPrairie School houses are characterized by open floor plans, horizontal lines, and indigenous materials. These were related to the American Arts and Crafts movement and its emphasis on hand craftsmanship, simplicity, and function. Both were alternatives to the then-dominant Classical Revival Style of Greek forms with occasional Roman influences. Some firms, such as Purcell & Elmslie , which accepted the honest presence of machine worked surfaces, consciously rejected the term \"Arts and Crafts\" for their work. The Prairie School was also heavily influenced by the Idealistic Romantics who believed better homes would create better people, and the Transcendentalist philosophy of Ralph Waldo Emerson . In turn, Prairie School architects influenced subsequent architectural idioms, particularly the less is more ethos of Minimalists and form following function in Bauhaus , itself a mixture of De Stijl grid-based design and Constructist emphasis on the structure itself and its building materials.\n\nArchitectural historians have debated the reasons why the Prairie School went out of favor by the mid-1920s. In her autobiography, Prairie School architect Marion Mahony suggests:\n\nThe enthusiastic and able young men as proved in their later work were doubtless as influential in the office later as were these early ones but Wright's early concentration on publicity and his claims that everybody was his disciple had a deadening influence on the Chicago group and only after a quarter of a century do we find creative architecture conspicuously evident in the United States. \n\nAn example of Prairie School architecture is the aptly named \" The Prairie School \", a private day school in Racine, Wisconsin , designed by Taliesin Associates (an architectural firm originated by Wright), and located almost adjacent to Wright's Wingspread Conference Center. Mahony's and Griffin's work in Australia and India, notably the collection of homes at Castlecrag , New South Wales, are fine examples of how the Prairie School spread far from its Chicago roots. Isabel Roberts ' Veterans' Memorial Library in St. Cloud, Florida , is another. The House at 8 Berkley Drive at Lockport, New York was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2009. \n\nThe Oak Circle Historic District is a historic district in Wilmette , Illinois, United States. It primarily consists of fifteen single-family homes representative of the Prairie School and Craftsman styles of architecture constructed between 1917 and 1929. The Oak Circle Historic District was added to the National Register of Historic Places on June 21, 2001; it was the first historic district to be designated in Wilmette.\n\nThe Rock Crest–Rock Glen Historic District is a nationally recognized historic district located in Mason City, Iowa . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1979. All of the buildings are houses designed in the Prairie School style, and are a part of a planned development. Mason City is also home to The Historic Park Inn Hotel and City National Bank , two adjacent commercial buildings designed in the Prairie School style. Completed in 1910, the Historic Park Inn Hotel is the last remaining Frank Lloyd Wright-designed hotel in the world, of the six for which he was the architect of record. The Dr. G.C. Stockman House is another example of Frank Lloyd Wright's Prairie School style found in Mason City, Iowa. Built in 1908, the Stockman House was the first Wright-designed Prairie School-style house in Iowa. Today, the house functions as a museum welcoming visitors and architectural enthusiasts from all around the world.\n\nInterest in the ideas and designs of the Prairie School artists and architects has grown since the late 1980s, thanks in large part to celebrity collecting habits and high-profile auction results on many of the decorative designs from buildings of the era. In addition to numerous books, magazine articles, videos and merchandise promoting the movement, a number of original Prairie School building sites have become public museums, open for tours and special interactive events. Several not-for-profit organizations and on-line communities have been formed to educate people about the Prairie School movement and help preserve the designs associated with it. Some of these organizations and sites are listed in the External links section below.",
  "An origin myth is a type of myth that explains the beginnings of a natural or social aspect of the world. Creation myths are a type of origin myth narrating the formation of the universe. However, numerous cultures have stories that take place after the initial origin. These stories aim to explain the origins of natural phenomena or human institutions within an already existing world. In Greco-Roman scholarship, the terms founding myth or etiological myth (from Ancient Greek : αἴτιον aition 'cause') are occasionally used to describe a myth that clarifies an origin, particularly how an object or custom came into existence.\n\nIn modern political discourse the terms \"founding myth\", \"foundational myth\", etc. are often used as critical references to official or widely accepted narratives about the origins or early history of a nation, a society, a culture, etc. \n\nOrigin myths are narratives that explain how a particular reality came into existence. They often serve to justify the established order by attributing its establishment to sacred forces (see § Social function ). The line between cosmogonic myths which describe the origin of the world and origin myths is not always clear. A myth about the origin of a specific part of the world assumes the existence of the world itself, which often relies on a cosmogonic myth. Therefore, origin myths can be seen as expanding upon and building upon their cultures' cosmogonic myths. In traditional cultures, it is common for the recitation of an origin myth to be preceded by the recitation of a cosmogonic myth. \n\nWithin academic circles, the term myth is often used specifically to refer to origin and cosmogonic myths. Folklorists, for example, reserve the term myth for stories that describe creation. Stories that do not primarily focus on origins are categorized as legend or folk tale , which are distinct from myths according to folklorists. Mircea Eliade , a historian, argues that in many traditional cultures, almost every sacred story can be considered an origin myth. Traditional societies often pattern their behavior after sacred events and view their lives as a cyclical return to a mythical age. As a result, nearly every sacred story portrays events that establish a new framework for human behavior, making them essentially stories of creation. \n\nAn origin myth often functions to justify the current state of affairs. In traditional cultures, the entities and forces described in origin myths are often considered sacred. Thus, by attributing the state of the universe to the actions of these entities and forces, origin myths give the current order an aura of sacredness: \"[M]yths reveal that the World, man, and life have a supernatural origin and history, and that this history is significant, precious, and exemplary\". Many cultures instill the expectation that people take mythical gods and heroes as their role models , imitating their deeds and upholding the customs they established:\n\nWhen the missionary and ethnologist C. Strehlow asked the Australian Arunta why they performed certain ceremonies, the answer was always: \"Because the ancestors so commanded it.\" The Kai of New Guinea refused to change their way of living and working, and they explained: \"It was thus that the Nemu (the Mythical Ancestors) did, and we do likewise.\" Asked the reason for a particular detail in a ceremony, a Navaho chanter answered: \"Because the Holy People did it that way in the first place.\" We find exactly the same justification in the prayer that accompanies a primitive Tibetan ritual: \"As it has been handed down from the beginning of the earth’s creation, so must we sacrifice. … As our ancestors in ancient times did—so do we now.\" \n\nFounding myths unite people and tend to include mystical events along the way to make \"founders\" seem more desirable and heroic. Ruling monarchs or aristocracies may allege descent from mythical founders, gods or heroes in order to legitimate their control. For example, Julius Caesar and his relatives claimed Aeneas (and through Aeneas, the goddess Venus ) as an ancestor.\n\nA founding myth or etiological myth (Greek aition ) explains either:\n\nBeginning in prehistorical times, many civilizations and kingdoms adopted some version of a heroic model national origin myth, including the Hittites and Zhou dynasty in the Bronze Age; the Scythians , Wusun , Romans and Goguryeo in antiquity ; Turks and Mongols during the Middle Ages; and the Dzungar Khanate in the early modern period . \n\nIn the founding myth of the Zhou dynasty in China, Lady Yuan makes a ritual sacrifice to conceive, then becomes pregnant after stepping into the footprint of the King of Heaven. She gives birth to a son, Hou Ji , whom she leaves alone in dangerous places where he is protected by sheep, cattle, birds, and woodcutters. Convinced that he is a supernatural being, she takes him back and raises him. When he grows to adulthood, he takes the position of Master of Horses in the court of Emperor Yao , and becomes successful at growing grains, gourds and beans. According to the legend, he becomes founder of the Zhou dynasty after overthrowing the evil ruler of Shang. \n\nLike other civilizations, the Scythians also claimed descent from the son of the god of heaven. One day, the daughter of the god of the Dnieper River stole a young man's horses while he was herding his cattle , and forced him to lie with her before returning them. From this union, she conceived three sons, giving them their father's greatbow when they came of age. The son who could draw the bow would become king. All tried, but only the youngest was successful. On his attempt, three golden objects fell from the sky: a plow and yoke, a sword, and a cup. When the eldest two tried to pick them up, fire prevented them. After this, it was decided the youngest son, Scythes, would become king, and his people would be known as Scythians. \n\nThe Torah (or Pentateuch, as biblical scholars sometimes call it) is the collective name for the first five books of the Bible: Genesis , Exodus , Leviticus , Numbers , and Deuteronomy . It forms the charter myth of Israel, the story of the people's origins and the foundations of their culture and institutions, and it is a fundamental principle of Judaism that the relationship between God and his chosen people was set out on Mount Sinai through the Torah.\n\nA founding myth may serve as the primary exemplum , as the myth of Ixion was the original Greek example of a murderer rendered unclean by his crime, who needed cleansing ( catharsis ) of his impurity.\n\nFounding myths feature prominently in Greek mythology . \"Ancient Greek rituals were bound to prominent local groups and hence to specific localities\", Walter Burkert has observed, \"i.e., the sanctuaries and altars that had been set up for all time\". Thus Greek and Hebrew founding myths established the special relationship between a deity and local people, who traced their origins from a hero and authenticated their ancestral rights through the founding myth. Greek founding myths often embody a justification for the ancient overturning of an older, archaic order, reformulating a historical event anchored in the social and natural world to valorize current community practices, creating symbolic narratives of \"collective importance\" enriched with metaphor to account for traditional chronologies, and constructing an etiology considered to be plausible among those with a cultural investment. \n\nIn the Greek view, the mythic past had deep roots in historic time, its legends treated as facts, as Carlo Brillante has noted, its heroic protagonists seen as links between the \"age of origins\" and the mortal, everyday world that succeeded it. A modern translator of Apollonius of Rhodes ' Argonautica has noted, of the many aitia embedded as digressions in that Hellenistic epic, that \"crucial to social stability had to be the function of myths in providing explanations, authorization or empowerment for the present in terms of origins: this could apply, not only to foundations or charter myths and genealogical trees (thus supporting family or territorial claims) but also to personal moral choices.\" In the period after Alexander the Great expanded the Hellenistic world, Greek poetry— Callimachus wrote a whole work simply titled Aitia —is replete with founding myths. Simon Goldhill employs the metaphor of sedimentation in describing Apollonius' laying down of layers \"where each object, cult, ritual, name, may be opened... into a narrative of origination, and where each narrative, each event, may lead to a cult, ritual, name, monument.\" \n\nA notable example is the myth of the foundation of Rome—the tale of Romulus and Remus , which Virgil in turn broadens in his Aeneid with the odyssey of Aeneas and his razing of Lavinium , and his son Iulus 's later relocation and rule of the famous twins' birthplace Alba Longa , and their descent from his royal line, thus fitting perfectly into the already established canon of events. Similarly, the Old Testament's story of the Exodus serves as the founding myth for the community of Israel, telling how God delivered the Israelites from slavery and how they therefore belonged to him through the Covenant of Mount Sinai . \n\nDuring the Middle Ages, founding myths of the medieval communes of northern Italy manifested the increasing self-confidence of the urban population and the will to find a Roman origin, however tenuous and legendary. In 13th-century Padua , when each commune looked for a Roman founder – and if one was not available, invented one—a legend had been current in the city, attributing its foundation to the Trojan Antenor . ",
  "A laufhaus is a building with apartments that sex workers can rent and use as their base of operation. Laufhauses are very popular types of brothels in Germany , Austria and Switzerland . When translated, \"laufhaus\" means running-house , where lauf means to run and haus stands for house . The women who work in laufhauses are allowed to stay and sleep there even when they are not working. \n\nUnlike other forms of brothels, laufhauses do not require clients to pay an entry fee. Clients are free to roam in the building and to inspect the women who are working. Usually, the doors have some sort of indicator to show if the woman who works in the particular room is available or not. Clients can knock on the doors where women are available and ask them about the prices and the services that are offered. Clients can negotiate about the services and the price with the women and they can move on to another room if they do not like what they see/hear. \n\nThe landlord who owns the building rents out the rooms to the women and the women are required to pay rent on a daily/weekly or monthly basis (depending on the Laufhaus). In addition to renting out the rooms, the landlord also has the obligation of creating a website for the laufhaus, keeping it updated with new women and informing the clients which women are currently working. \n\nWomen who work in laufhauses make their money by offering various types of sexual services to clients. Clients pay directly to the women before the session. The money that the women make is their own and they do not have to give any of it to someone else. Laufhaus owners make money by renting out the rooms to sex workers. Most of the time, this is the only way owners of laufhauses make a profit.\n\nWhile in most types of brothels, the women have to give a percentage of their earnings to the owner, in laufhauses they can keep all of the money for themselves, other than paying the rent. Laufhauses do not offer drinks or food to the clients, like most Sauna clubs or sex clubs do. There are some laufhauses that have drink vending machines, but not alcoholic beverages. Classic brothels regularly host events and different kinds of happenings; this is something that does not happen in laufhauses.",
  "Wagoto ( 和事 ) , or soft style , is a style of kabuki acting that emphasizes realistic speech and gestures. Wagoto actors typically do not employ the exaggerated makeup and costuming common to the more exaggerated aragoto ( rough ) style.\n\nWagoto was pioneered by Sakata Tōjūrō I , an actor in the Kamigata ( Osaka - Kyoto ) region. Plays that emphasize wagoto roles are typically tragic romances. Famous plays that emphasize wagoto roles include Sonezaki Shinjū ( The Love Suicides at Sonezaki ) and Kuruwa Bunshō ( Tales of the Licensed Quarter ).\n\nWagotoshi refers to Kabuki actors who specialize in wagoto roles. Notable wagotoshi include Bandō Kakitsu I and Matsumoto Kōshirō VII .\n\nThis article related to the culture of Japan is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Consecration is the transfer of a person or a thing to the sacred sphere for a special purpose or service. The word consecration literally means \"association with the sacred \". Persons, places, or things can be consecrated, and the term is used in various ways by different groups. The origin of the word comes from the Latin stem consecrat , which means dedicated, devoted, and sacred. A synonym for consecration is sanctification ; its antonym is desecration .\n\nIn Christianity , consecration means \"setting apart\" a person, as well as a building or object, for God. Among some Christian denominations there is a complementary service of \" deconsecration \", to remove a consecrated place of its sacred character in preparation for either demolition or sale for secular use.\n\n\"Consecration\" is used in the Catholic Church as the setting apart for the service of God, of both persons and objects.\n\nThe Constitution on the Sacred Liturgy of the Second Vatican Council Sacrosanctum Concilium n. 76 states,\n\nBoth the ceremonies and texts of the ordination rites are to be revised. The address given by the bishop at the beginning of each ordination or consecration may be in the mother tongue.\n\nWhen a bishop is consecrated, the laying of hands may be done by all the bishops present.\n\nThe English text of Catechism of the Catholic Church , Second Edition, 1997, under the heading \"Episcopal ordination—fullness of the sacrament of Holy Orders \", uses \"episcopal consecration\" and \"episcopal ordination\" interchangeably (CCC, 1556–1558).\n\nThe 1983 Code of Canon Law of the Latin Church states in §§ 1012, 1014: \"sacrae ordinationis minister est Episcopus consecratus\" and uses the term consecratione episcopali (\"episcopal consecration\").\n\nConsecrated virgins are consecrated by the diocesan bishop according to the approved liturgical rite and spend their time in works of penance and mercy, in apostolic activity and in prayer.\n\nThose who enter religious institutes , societies of apostolic life, secular institutes or are recognised as a diocesan hermit are also members of the consecrated life .\n\nChrism , an anointing oil, is (usually scented) olive oil consecrated by a bishop.\n\nObjects such as patens and chalices , used for the sacrament of the Eucharist, are consecrated by a bishop, using chrism. The day before a new priest is ordained, there may be a vigil and a service or Mass at which the ordaining Bishop consecrates the paten(s) and chalice(s) of the ordinands (the men who are transitional deacons, about to be ordained priests).\n\nA more solemn rite exists for what used to be called the \"consecration of an altar\", either of the altar alone or as the central part of the rite for a church. The rite is now called the dedication . Since it would be contradictory to dedicate to the service of God a mortgage-burdened building, the rite of solemn dedication of a church is carried out only if the building is debt-free.\n\nA very special act of consecration is that of the Eucharistic gifts bread and wine in the Holy Mass , which according to Catholic belief involves their change into the Body and Blood of Christ , a change referred to as transubstantiation .\n\nIn the Eastern Orthodox Churches and the Eastern Catholic Churches , the term \"consecration\" can refer to either the Sacred Mystery (sacrament) of Cheirotonea (ordination through laying on of hands) of a bishop, or the sanctification and solemn dedication of a church building. It can also (more rarely) be used to describe the change of the bread and wine into the Body and Blood of Christ at the Divine Liturgy . The Chrism used at Chrismation and the Antimension placed on the Holy Table are also said to be consecrated.\n\nChurch buildings , chapels , altars , and Communion vessels are consecrated for the purpose of religious worship .\n\nA person may be consecrated for a specific role within a religious hierarchy, or a person may consecrate his or her life in an act of devotion . In particular, the ordination of a bishop is often called a consecration. In churches that follow the doctrine of apostolic succession (the historical episcopate ), the bishops who consecrate a new bishop are known as the consecrators and form an unbroken line of succession back to the Apostles . Those who take the vows of religious life are said to be living a consecrated life . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn the Church of England (Mother Church of the Anglican Communion ), an order closing a church may remove the legal effects of consecration.\n\nIn Methodist theology , entire consecration is an act made by an individual who has experienced the New Birth , but prior to entire sanctification : \n\nConsecration necessary for entire sanctification, is the total abandonment of the redeemed soul to the whole will of God (Romans 12:1; 6:11, 13, 22). As such it takes place after the work of regeneration and must be completed before the soul is sanctified. While the act of consecration depends wholly upon the individual, the scope of consecration must be dictated by the Holy Spirit (acts 5:32). In saying that consecration is the act of the creature, it must be understood that every step in grace is undertaken through the assistance of the Holy Spirit (1 Peter 1:22). The consecration becomes so deep that it includes perfect submission to the crucifixion of the body of sin (Romans 6:6, Galatians 2:20; 5:24). ―Principles of Faith, Emmanuel Association of Churches \n\nIn a prayer of entire consecration, a Christian surrenders himself/herself to God in order to allow Him to entirely sanctify his/her soul. A believer offers to God \"his time, his plans, his possessions, himself, his all\" in consecration. As such, consecration is \"a pledge of an eternal 'yes' to all the will of God\" in Wesleyan-Arminian theology. With this human initiative of setting oneself apart for God, the believer is able to be entirely sanctified; the theology behind consecration is summarized with the maxim \"Give yourself to God in all things, if you would have God give Himself to you.\" United Methodist elder Craig Adams in discussing \"the need for a particular moment of consecration and faith in a believer's life\", referenced the theological tract On the Act or Covenant of Religious Consecration , authored by Thomas Cogswell Upham , which provides the following prayer of consecration composed by cleric Philip Doddridge as an example: \n\nEternal and ever blessed God! I desire to present myself before Thee with the deepest humiliation and abasement of soul, sensible how unworthy such a sinful worm is, to appear before the Holy Majesty of heaven, and to enter into a Covenant transaction with Thee. I come acknowledging myself to have been a great offender; smiting on my breast and saying with the humble publican, God be merciful to me a sinner. I come invited in the name of thy Son, and wholly trusting in his perfect righteousness; intreating that, for his sake, Thou wilt be merciful to my unrighteousness, and wilt no more remember my sins.\n\nPermit me, O Lord, to bring back unto Thee those powers and faculties, which I have ungratefully and sacrilegiously alienated from thy service: And receive, I beseech Thee, thy poor revolted creature, who is now convinced of thy right to him, and desires nothing in the world so much as to be Thine. It is with the utmost solemnity, that I make this surrender of myself unto Thee. I avouch the Lord this day to be my God; and I avouch and declare myself this day to be one of his Covenant children and people. Hear, O Thou God of heaven, and record it in the book of thy remembrance, that I am thine, ENTIRELY THINE. I would not merely consecrate to Thee some of my powers, or some of my possessions, or give Thee a certain portion of my services, or all I am capable of for a limited time; [but I give myself to Thee and promise, relying upon thy divine assistance, ] to be wholly thine and thine forever.\n\nFrom this day do I solemnly renounce all the former Lords, which have had dominion over me, every sin and every lust, and in thy name set myself in eternal opposition to the powers of Hell, which have most unjustly usurped the empire over my soul, and to all the corruptions, which their fatal temptations have introduced into it. The whole frame of my nature, all the faculties of my mind and all the members of my body would I present before Thee this day, as a living sacrifice HOLY and ACCEPTABLE to God, which I know to be my most reasonable service. [To thee I consecrate not only my person and powers,] but all my worldly possessions; and earnestly pray Thee also to give me strength and courage to exert for thy glory all the influence I may have over others in the relations of life, in which I stand.\n\nNor do I only consecrate all that I am and have to do thy service; but I also most humbly resign and submit myself and all that I can call mine, [to endure and suffer at thy hand whatsoever thou mayst see fit to impose upon me in the dispensations] of thy holy and sovereign will. I leave, O Lord, to thy management and direction all I possess and all I wish; and set every enjoyment and every interest before Thee, to be disposed of as thou pleasest; contentedly resolving, in all that thou appointest for me, my will into Thine, and looking on myself as NOTHING, and on Thee, O God, as the great, Eternal All, whose word ought to determine every thing; and whose government ought to be the joy of the whole rational creation.\n\nReceive, O heavenly Father, thy returning prodigal! Wash me in the blood of thy dear Son! Clothe me with thy perfect righteousness; and sanctify me throughout by the power of thy Spirit. And O Lord, when thou seest the agonies of dissolving nature upon me, remember this Covenant, even though I should then be incapable of recollecting it, and look with pitying eye upon thy dying child. Put strength and confidence into my departing spirit; and receive it to the embraces of thine everlasting love. Amen. \n\nThe Probationer's Handbook , one of the most widely used catechisms of the Methodist Episcopal Church for probationers seeking full membership in the connexion, provided probationers a prayer of entire consecration to be used if the probationer had not already consecrated himself/herself to God; it implored the probationer: \"If you are\nnot fully consecrated to God, lay all on the altar immediately.\" \n\nThe Methodist Book of Worship for Church and Home (1965) contains liturgies for \"The Order for the Consecration of Bishops\", \"An Office for the Consecration of Deaconesses\", \"An Office for the Consecration of Directors of Christian Education and Directors of Music\", as well as \"An Office for the Opening or Consecrating of a Church Building\" among others. \n\nChurches of the Holiness Pentecostal tradition, such as the Apostolic Faith Church , teach, as with Methodism, the necessity of entire consecration prior to entire sanctification —the definite, second work of grace. Holiness Pentecostalism teaches that another deeper consecration must be made prior to receiving Spirit baptism evidenced by speaking in tongues—the third work of grace. \n\nMormonism is replete with consecration doctrine, primarily Christ's title of \"The Anointed One\" signifying his official, authorized and unique role as the savior of mankind from sin and death, and secondarily each individual's opportunity and ultimate responsibility to accept Jesus' will for their life and consecrate themselves to living thereby wholeheartedly. Book of Mormon examples include \"sanctification cometh because of their yielding their hearts unto God\" (Heleman 3:35) and \"come unto Christ, who is the Holy One of Israel, and partake of his salvation, and the power of his redemption, ... and offer your whole souls as an offering unto him, and continue in fasting and praying, and endure to the end; and as the Lord liveth ye will be saved\" (Omni 1:26).",
  "Rediff.com , stylized as rediff.com , is an Indian news, information, entertainment, and shopping website. Founded by Ajit Balakrishnan in 1996, it was the first Indian website to become a mainstream news media organization. It is headquartered in Mumbai with offices in Bangalore , New Delhi , and New York City . \n\nAs of 2009 [update] , it had more than 300 employees. At the time of its founding, internet access had only been available in India for five months with a mere 18,000 users, leaving Rediff.com as one of the earliest Indian web portals and email providers . \n\nRediff has there main businesses as News , Moneywizz , Portfolio , Rediff Gurus and Mail\n\nThe Rediff.com domain was registered in India in 1996. Early products included the email service Rediffmail and Rediff Shopping, an online marketplace selling electronics and peripherals. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 2001, Rediff.com was alleged to be in violation of the Securities Act of 1933 for filing a materially false prospectus in relation to an IPO of its American depositary shares . The case was resolved by settlement in 2009. \n\nIn April 2001, Rediff.com acquired the India Abroad newspaper. \n\nIn 2007, Rediff iShare, a multimedia platform, was released. In 2010, Rediffmail NG was launched, an email service for mobile platforms. In 2012, Rediff launched its Android App for Rediff News. \n\nIn April 2016, the company decided to delist from NASDAQ , citing the high cost of reporting requirements, given its financial condition. \n\nIn 2024, Rediff.com became a subsidiary of Infibeam Avenues, which acquired a 54.1 per cent stake in Rediff.com India Ltd. Infibeam founder Vishal Mehta became Rediff’s new Chairman and Managing Director, succeeding Ajit Balakrishnan , who had led the company since its founding in 1996. ",
  "In French literature , the moralists ( French : moralistes ) were a tradition of secular writers who described \"personal, social and political conduct\", typically through maxims . The tradition is associated with the salons of the Ancien Régime from the 16th through the 18th centuries. The tradition begins with the Essais of Michel de Montaigne (1580), but its heyday was the late 17th century. \n\nAlthough the moralists wrote essays and pen-portraits , their preferred genre was the maxim. These were short abstract statements devoid of context, often containing paradoxes and always designed to shock or surprise. The moralists aimed for objective and impartial observation freed from the preconceptions of their day. Their approach was never systematic. The four principal moralists and their main works are:\n\nThis article about a literary movement is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Cycling , also known as bicycling or biking , is the activity of riding a bicycle or other types of pedal -driven human-powered vehicles such as balance bikes , unicycles , tricycles , and quadricycles . Cycling is practised around the world for purposes including transport , recreation , exercise , and competitive sport .\n\nCycling became popularized in Europe and North America in the latter part and especially the last decade of the 19th century. Today, over 50 percent of the human population knows how to ride a bike. \n\nThe bicycle has been used as a method of reconnaissance as well as transporting soldiers and supplies to combat zones. In this it has taken over many of the functions of horses in warfare . In the Second Boer War , both sides used bicycles for scouting. In World War I, France, Germany, Australia and New Zealand used bicycles to move troops. In its 1937 invasion of China, Japan employed some 50,000 bicycle troops, and similar forces were instrumental in Japan's march or \"roll\" through Malaya in World War II . Germany used bicycles again in World War II, while the British employed airborne \"Cycle-commandos\" with folding bikes .\n\nIn the Vietnam War , communist forces used bicycles extensively as cargo carriers along the Ho Chi Minh Trail .\n\nThe last country known to maintain a regiment of bicycle troops was Switzerland, which disbanded its last unit in 2003.\n\nIn many countries, the most commonly used vehicle for road transport is a utility bicycle . These have frames with relaxed geometry, protecting the rider from shocks of the road and easing steering at low speeds. Utility bicycles tend to be equipped with accessories such as mudguards, pannier racks and lights, which extend their usefulness on a daily basis. Since the bicycle is so effective as a means of transportation, various companies have developed methods of carrying anything from the weekly shop to children on bicycles. Certain countries rely heavily on bicycles and their culture has developed around the bicycle as a primary form of transport. In Europe, Denmark and the Netherlands have the most bicycles per capita and most often use bicycles for everyday transport. \n\nRoad bikes tend to have a more upright shape and a shorter wheelbase, which make the bike more mobile but harder to ride slowly. The design, coupled with low or dropped handlebars, requires the rider to bend forward more, making use of stronger muscles (particularly the gluteus maximus ) and reducing air resistance at high speed.\n\nRoad bikes are designed for speed and efficiency on paved roads. They are characterized by their lightweight frames, skinny tires, drop handlebars, and narrow saddles. Road bikes are ideal for racing, long-distance riding, and fitness training.\n\nOther common types of bikes include gravel bikes , designed for use on gravel roads or trails, but with the ability to ride well on pavement; mountain bikes , which are designed for more rugged, undulating terrain; and e-bikes , which provide some level of motorized assist for the rider. There are additional variations of bikes and types of biking as well. \n\nThe price of a new bicycle can range from US$50 to more than US$20,000 (the highest priced bike in the world is the custom Madone by Damien Hirst , sold at US$500,000 ), depending on quality, type and weight (the most exotic road bicycles can weigh as little as 3.2 kg (7 lb) ). However, UCI regulations stipulate a legal race bike cannot weigh less than 6.8 kg (14.99 lbs). Being measured for a bike and taking it for a test ride are recommended before buying.\n\nThe drivetrain components of the bike should also be considered. A middle grade dérailleur is sufficient for a beginner, although many utility bikes are equipped with hub gears . If the rider plans a significant amount of hillclimbing , a triple-chainrings crankset gear system may be preferred. Otherwise, the relatively lighter, simpler, and less expensive double chainring is preferred, even on high-end race bikes. Much simpler fixed wheel bikes are also available.\n\nMany road bikes, along with mountain bikes, include clipless pedals to which special shoes attach, via a cleat , enabling the rider to pull on the pedals as well as push. Other possible accessories for the bicycle include front and rear lights, bells or horns, child carrying seats, cycling computers with GPS, locks, bar tape, fenders (mud-guards), baggage racks, baggage carriers and pannier bags, water bottles and bottle cages.\n\nFor basic maintenance and repairs cyclists can carry a pump (or a CO 2 cartridge ), a puncture repair kit, a spare inner tube, and tire levers and a set of allen keys . Cycling can be more efficient and comfortable with special shoes , gloves , and shorts . In wet weather, riding can be more tolerable with waterproof clothes, such as cape, jacket, trousers (pants) and overshoes and high-visibility clothing is advisable to reduce the risk from motor vehicle users.\n\nItems legally required in some jurisdictions, or voluntarily adopted for safety reasons, include bicycle helmets , generator or battery operated lights, reflectors , and audible signalling devices such as a bell or horn. Extras include studded tires and a bicycle computer .\n\nBikes can also be heavily customized, with different seat designs and handle bars, for example. Gears can also be customized to better suit the rider's strength in relation to the terrain.\n\nMany schools and police departments run educational programs to instruct children in bicycle handling skills, especially to introduce them to the rules of the road as they apply to cyclists. In some countries these may be known as bicycle rodeos , or operated as schemes such as Bikeability in the UK. Education for adult cyclists is available from organizations such as the League of American Bicyclists .\n\nBeyond simply riding, another skill is riding efficiently and safely in traffic. One popular approach to riding in motor vehicle traffic is vehicular cycling , occupying road space as car does. Alternately, in countries such as Denmark and the Netherlands, where cycling is popular, cyclists are often segregated into bike lanes at the side of, or more often separate from, main highways and roads. Many primary schools participate in the national road test in which children individually complete a circuit on roads near the school while being observed by testers.\n\nCyclists, pedestrians and motorists make different demands on road design which may lead to conflicts. Some jurisdictions give priority to motorized traffic, for example setting up one-way street systems, free-right turns, high capacity roundabouts, and slip roads . Others share priority with cyclists so as to encourage more cycling by applying varying combinations of traffic calming measures to limit the impact of motorized transport, and by building bike lanes , bike paths and cycle tracks . The provision of cycling infrastructure varies widely between cities and countries, particularly since cycling for transportation almost entirely occurs in public streets. And, the development of computer vision and street view imagery has provided significant potential to assess infrastructure for cyclists. \n\nIn jurisdictions where motor vehicles were given priority, cycling has tended to decline while in jurisdictions where cycling infrastructure was built, cycling rates have remained steady or increased. Occasionally, extreme measures against cycling may occur. In Shanghai, where bicycles were once the dominant mode of transport , bicycle travel on a few city roads was banned temporarily in December 2003. \n\nIn areas in which cycling is popular and encouraged, cycle-parking facilities using bicycle stands , lockable mini-garages, and patrolled cycle parks are used to reduce theft. Local governments promote cycling by permitting bicycles to be carried on public transport or by providing external attachment devices on public transport vehicles. Conversely, an absence of secure cycle-parking is a recurring complaint by cyclists from cities with low modal share of cycling.\n\nExtensive cycling infrastructure may be found in some cities. Such dedicated paths in some cities often have to be shared with in-line skaters, scooters, skateboarders, and pedestrians. Dedicated cycling infrastructure is treated differently in the law of every jurisdiction, including the question of liability of users in a collision. There is also some debate about the safety of the various types of separated facilities.\n\nBicycles are considered a sustainable mode of transport, especially suited for urban use and relatively shorter distances when used for transport (compared to recreation). Case studies and good practices (from European cities and some worldwide examples) that promote and stimulate this kind of functional cycling in cities can be found at Eltis , Europe's portal for local transport.\n\nA number of cities, including Paris, London and Barcelona , now have successful bike hire schemes designed to help people cycle in the city. Typically these feature utilitarian city bikes which lock into docking stations, released on payment for set time periods. Costs vary from city to city. In London, initial hire access costs £2 per day. The first 30 minutes of each trip is free, with £2 for each additional 30 minutes until the bicycle is returned. \n\nIn the Netherlands, many roads have one or two separate cycleways alongside them, or cycle lanes marked on the road. On roads where adjacent bike paths or cycle tracks exist, the use of these facilities is compulsory, and cycling on the main carriageway is not permitted. Some 35,000 km of cycle-track has been physically segregated from motor traffic, equal to a quarter of the country's entire 140,000 km road network. A quarter of all trips in the country are made on bicycles, one quarter of them to work. Even the prime minister goes to work by bicycle, when weather permits. This saves the lives of 6,000 citizens per year, prolongs life expectancy by 6 months, saves the country 20 million dollars per year, and prevents 150 grams of CO 2 from being emitted per kilometer of cycling. \n\nUtility cycling refers both to cycling as a mode of daily commuting transport as well as the use of a bicycle in a commercial activity, mainly to transport goods, mostly accomplished in an urban environment . \n\nThe postal services of many countries have long relied on bicycles. The British Royal Mail first started using bicycles in 1880; now bicycle delivery fleets include 37,000 in the UK, 25,700 in Germany, 10,500 in Hungary and 7000 in Sweden. In Australia, Australia Post has also reintroduced bicycle postal deliveries on some routes due to an inability to recruit sufficient licensed riders willing to use their uncomfortable motorbikes. The London Ambulance Service has recently introduced bicycling paramedics , who can often get to the scene of an incident in Central London more quickly than a motorized ambulance. \n\nThe use of bicycles by police has been increasing, since they provide greater accessibility to bicycle and pedestrian zones and allow access when roads are congested. In some cases, bicycle officers have been used as a supplement or a replacement for horseback officers.\n\nBicycles enjoy substantial use as general delivery vehicles in many countries. In the UK and North America, as their first jobs, generations of teenagers have worked at delivering newspapers by bicycle. London has many delivery companies that use bicycles with trailers. Most cities in the West, and many outside it, support a sizeable and visible industry of cycle couriers who deliver documents and small packages. In India, many of Mumbai's Dabbawalas use bicycles to deliver home cooked lunches to the city's workers. In Bogotá , Colombia the city's largest bakery recently replaced most of its delivery trucks with bicycles. Even the car industry uses bicycles. At the huge Mercedes-Benz factory in Sindelfingen , Germany workers use bicycles, color-coded by department, to move around the factory. [ citation needed ]\n\nBicycles are used for recreation at all ages. Bicycle touring , also known as cyclotourism, involves touring and exploration or sightseeing by bicycle for leisure. Bicycle tourism has been one of the most popular sports for recreational benefit. A brevet or randonnée is an organized long-distance ride.\n\nOne popular Dutch pleasure is the enjoyment of relaxed cycling in the countryside of the Netherlands. The land is very flat and full of public bicycle trails and cycle tracks where cyclists are not bothered by cars and other traffic, which makes it ideal for cycling recreation. Many Dutch people subscribe every year to an event called fietsvierdaagse — four days of organised cycling through the local environment. Paris–Brest–Paris (PBP), which began in 1891, is the oldest bicycling event still run on a regular basis on the open road, covers over 1,200 km (746 mi) and imposes a 90-hour time limit. Similar if smaller institutions exist in many countries.\n\nA study conducted in Taiwan improved the environmental quality for bicyclist tourists which demonstrated greater health benefits in tourists and even in natives. The number of bicyclists in Taiwan increased from 700,000 in 2008 to 5.1 million in 2017. Thus, this resulted in more and safer bicycle routes to be established. When cycling, cyclists take into account the safety on the road, bicycle lanes, smooth roads, diverse scenery, and ride length. Thus, the environment plays a huge role in people's decision factor to use bicycle touring more. This study used many questionnaires and conducted statistical analysis to come up with the conclusion of cyclists' top 5 factors that they consider before making a decision to bike are: safety, lighting facility, design of lanes, the surrounding landscape, and how clean the environment is. Thus, after improving these 5 factors, they found much more recreational benefits to bicycle tourism. \n\nMany cycling clubs hold organized rides in which bicyclists of all levels participate. The typical organized ride starts with a large group of riders, called the mass, bunch or even peloton . This will thin out over the course of the ride. Many riders choose to ride together in groups of the same skill level to take advantage of drafting .\n\nMost organized rides, for example cyclosportives (or gran fondos), Challenge Rides or reliability trials , and hill climbs include registration requirements and will provide information either through the mail or online concerning start times and other requirements. Rides usually consist of several different routes, sorted by mileage, and with a certain number of rest stops that usually include refreshments, first aid and maintenance tools. Routes can vary by as much as 100 miles (160 km).\n\nSome organized rides are entirely social events. One example is the monthly San Jose Bike Party which can reach attendance of one to two thousand riders in Summer months.\n\nMountain biking began in the 1970s, originally as a downhill sport, practised on customized cruiser bicycles around Mount Tamalpais . Most mountain biking takes place on dirt roads, trails and in purpose-built parks. Downhill mountain biking has just evolved in the recent years and is performed at places such as Whistler Mountain Bike Park. Slopestyle, a form of downhill, is when riders do tricks such as tailwhips, 360s, backflips and front flips.\nThere are several disciplines of mountain biking besides downhill, including: cross country (often referred to as XC), all mountain, trail, free ride, and newly popular enduro .\n\nIn 2020, due to COVID-19 , mountain bikes saw a surge in popularity in the US, with some vendors reporting that they were sold out of bikes under US$1000. \n\nThe Marching and Cycling Band HHK from Haarlem (the Netherlands) is one of the few marching bands around the world which also performs on bicycles.\n\nShortly after the introduction of bicycles, competitions developed independently in many parts of the world. Early races involving boneshaker style bicycles were predictably fraught with injuries. Large races became popular during the 1890s \"Golden Age of Cycling\", with events across Europe, and in the U.S. and Japan as well. At one point, almost every major city in the US had a velodrome or two for track racing events, however since the middle of the 20th century cycling has become a minority sport in the US whilst in Continental Europe it continues to be a major sport, particularly in the United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Italy and Spain. The most famous of all bicycle races is the Tour de France . This began in 1903, and continues to capture the attention of the sporting world.\n\nIn 1899, Charles Minthorn Murphy became the first man to ride his bicycle a mile in under a minute (hence his nickname, Mile-a-Minute Murphy), which he did by drafting a locomotive at New York 's Long Island .\n\nAs the bicycle evolved its various forms, different racing formats developed. Road races may involve both team and individual competition, and are contested in various ways. They range from the one-day road race, criterium , and time trial to multi-stage events like the Tour de France and its sister events which make up cycling's Grand Tours . Recumbent bicycles were banned from bike races in 1934 after Marcel Berthet set a new hour record in his Velodyne streamliner (49.992 km on 18 November 1933). Track bicycles are used for track cycling in Velodromes , while cyclo-cross races are held on outdoor terrain, including pavement, grass, and mud. Cyclocross races feature human-made features such as small barriers which riders either bunny hop over or dismount and walk over. Time trial races, another form of road racing require a rider to ride against the clock. Time trials can be performed as a team or as a single rider. Bikes are changed for time trial races, using aero bars . In the past decade, mountain bike racing has also reached international popularity and is even an Olympic sport.\n\nProfessional racing organizations place limitations on the bicycles that can be used in the races that they sanction. For example, the Union Cycliste Internationale, the governing body of international cycle sport (which sanctions races such as the Tour de France), decided in the late 1990s to create additional rules which prohibit racing bicycles weighing less than 6.8 kilograms (14.96 pounds). The UCI rules also effectively ban some bicycle frame innovations (such as the recumbent bicycle ) by requiring a double triangle structure. \n\nMany broad and correlated themes run in bicycle activism: one is about advocating the bicycle as an alternative mode of transport, and another is about the creation of conditions to permit and/or encourage bicycle use, both for utility and recreational cycling. Although the first emphasizes the potential for energy and resource conservation and health benefits gained from cycling versus automobile use, is relatively undisputed, the second is the subject of much debate.\n\nIt is generally agreed that improved local and inter-city rail services and other methods of mass transportation (including greater provision for cycle carriage on such services) create conditions to encourage bicycle use. However, there are different opinions on the role of various types of cycling infrastructure in building bicycle-friendly cities and roads.\n\nSome bicycle activists (including some traffic management advisers) seek the construction of bike paths , cycle tracks and bike lanes for journeys of all lengths and point to their success in promoting safety and encouraging more people to cycle. Some activists, especially those from the vehicular cycling tradition, view the safety, practicality, and intent of such facilities with suspicion. They favor a more holistic approach based on the 4 'E's : education (of everyone involved), encouragement (to apply the education), enforcement (to protect the rights of others), and engineering (to facilitate travel while respecting every person's equal right to do so). Some groups offer training courses to help cyclists integrate themselves with other traffic.\n\nCritical Mass is an event typically held on the last Friday of every month in cities around the world where bicyclists take to the streets en masse . While the ride was founded with the idea of drawing attention to how unfriendly the city was to bicyclists, the leaderless structure of Critical Mass makes it impossible to assign it any one specific goal. In fact, the purpose of Critical Mass is not formalized beyond the direct action of meeting at a set location and time and traveling as a group through city streets.\n\nThere is a long-running cycle helmet debate among activists. The most heated controversy surrounds the topic of compulsory helmet use . \n\nIt is paradoxical that in many developing countries cycling is in decline as bicycles are replaced by motorbikes and cars, while in many developed countries cycling is on the rise. \n\nWithin western societies the demographic of those who cycle is often not representative of broader society. Research by TfL in London, UK, suggests that cyclists in London are typically 'white, under 40, male, with medium to high household income.' Studies from large-scale representative data from Germany show that people with higher levels of education cycle substantially more often than those with lower levels of education. Even for trips of the same distance and among people from the same city with the same income level, those with higher education cycle more. As a result, there are various forms of activism focused on diversifying the cycling community. Inspired by the Black Lives Matter movement are organizations such as Street Riders NYC that seek to protest while on bicycles about systemic racism and police brutality. An incidental experience for Street Riders NYC protest participants is the inequity in where safe bicycling infrastructure exists by neighbourhood, which is interpreted as a form of classism within cycling and urbanism . The bicycle has acted as a means for women's liberation and thus has links to feminism . \n\nCyclists form associations, both for specific interests (trails development, road maintenance, bike maintenance, urban design, racing clubs, touring clubs, etc.) and for more global goals ( energy conservation , pollution reduction, promotion of fitness). Some bicycle clubs and national associations became prominent advocates for improvements to roads and highways. In the United States, the League of American Wheelmen lobbied for the improvement of roads in the last part of the 19th century, founding and leading the national Good Roads Movement . Their model for political organization, as well as the paved roads for which they argued, facilitated the growth of the automobile.\n\nIn Europe, the European Cyclists' Federation represents around 70 local, regional and national civil society organisations across more than 40 countries that work to promote cycling as a mode of transport and leisure. \n\nAs a sport, cycling is governed internationally by the Union Cycliste Internationale in Switzerland, USA Cycling (merged with the United States Cycling Federation in 1995) in the United States, (for upright bicycles ) and by the International Human Powered Vehicle Association (for other HPVs, or human-powered vehicles). Cycling for transport and touring is promoted on a European level by the European Cyclists' Federation , with associated members from Great Britain, Japan and elsewhere. Regular conferences on cycling as transport are held under the auspices of Velo City ; global conferences are coordinated by Velo Mondial. \n\nCycling is widely regarded as an effective and efficient mode of transportation optimal for short to moderate distances.\n\nBicycles provide numerous possible benefits in comparison with motor vehicles, including the sustained physical exercise involved in cycling, easier parking, increased maneuverability, and access to roads, bike paths and rural trails. Cycling also offers a reduced consumption of fossil fuels , less air and noise pollution , reduced greenhouse gas emissions, and greatly reduced traffic congestion . These have a lower financial cost for users as well as for society at large (negligible damage to roads, less road area required). By fitting bicycle racks on the front of buses, transit agencies can significantly increase the areas they can serve. \n\nAmong the disadvantages of cycling are the requirement of bicycles (excepting tricycles or quadricycles) for the rider to have certain level of basic skill to remain upright, the reduced protection in crashes in comparison to motor vehicles, often longer travel time (except in densely populated areas), vulnerability to weather conditions, difficulty in transporting passengers, and the fact that a basic level of fitness is required for cycling moderate to long distances.\n\nCycling provides a variety of health benefits and reduces the risk of cancers, heart disease, and diabetes that are prevalent in sedentary lifestyles. Cycling on stationary bikes have also been used as part of rehabilitation for lower limb injuries, particularly after hip surgery. Individuals who cycle regularly have also reported mental health improvements, including less perceived stress and better vitality. \n\nThe health benefits of cycling outweigh the risks, when cycling is compared to a sedentary lifestyle. A Dutch study found that cycling can extend lifespans by up to 14 months, but the risks equated to a reduced lifespan of 40 days or less. Mortality rate reduction was found to be directly correlated to the average time spent cycling, totaling to approximately 6500 deaths prevented by cycling. Cycling in the Netherlands is often safer than in other parts of the world, so the risk-benefit ratio will be different in other regions. Overall, benefits of cycling or walking have been shown to exceed risks by ratios of 9:1 to 96:1 when compared with no exercise at all, including a wide variety of physical and mental outcomes. \n\nThe physical exercise gained from cycling is generally linked with increased health and well-being. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), physical inactivity is second only to tobacco smoking as a health risk in developed countries, and is associated with 20-30% increased risk of various cancers, heart disease, and diabetes and tens of billions of dollars of healthcare costs. The WHO's 2009 report suggests that increasing physical activity is a public health \"best buy\", and that cycling is a \"highly suitable activity\" for this purpose. The charity Sustrans reports that investment in cycling provision can give a 20:1 return from health and other benefits. It has been estimated that, on average, approximately 20 life-years are gained from the health benefits of road bicycling for every life-year lost through injury. \n\nBicycles are often used by people seeking to improve their fitness and cardiovascular health. Recent studies on the use of cycling for commutes have shown that it reduces the risk of cardiovascular outcomes by 11%, with slightly more risk reduction in women than in men. In addition, cycling is especially helpful for those with arthritis of the lower limbs who are unable to pursue sports that cause impact to the knees and other joints. Since cycling can be used for the practical purpose of transportation, there can be less need for self-discipline to exercise.\n\nCycling while seated is a relatively non- weight bearing exercise that, like swimming , does little to promote bone density. Cycling up and out of the saddle, on the other hand, does a better job by transferring more of the rider's body weight to the legs. However, excessive cycling while standing can cause knee damage It used to be thought that cycling while standing was less energy efficient, but recent research has proven this not to be true. Other than air resistance, there is no wasted energy from cycling while standing, if it is done correctly. \n\nCycling on a stationary cycle is frequently advocated as a suitable exercise for rehabilitation, particularly for lower limb injury, owing to the low impact which it has on the joints. In particular, cycling is commonly used within knee rehabilitation programs, to strengthen the quadriceps muscles with minimal stress on the knee ligaments. Further stress of the knee can be relieved by changing seat heights and pedal position to improve the rehabilitation. Cycling is also used for rehabilitation after hip surgery to manage soft-tissue healing, control swelling and pain, and allow a larger range of motion to the nearby muscles earlier during recovery. As a result, many institutions have established a rehabilitation protocol that involves stationary cycling as part of the recovery process. One such protocol offered by Mayo Clinic recommends 2–4 weeks of cycling on an upright stationary bike following hip arthroscopy , starting from 5 minutes per session and slowly increasing to 30 minutes per session. The goal of these sessions are to reduce joint inflammation and maintain the widest range of motion possible with limited pain.\n\nAs a response to the increased global sedentary lifestyles and consequent overweight and obesity , one response that has been adopted by many organizations concerned with health and environment is the promotion of Active travel , which seeks to promote walking and cycling as safe and attractive alternatives to motorized transport. Given that many journeys are for relatively short distances, there is considerable scope to replace car use with walking or cycling, though in many settings this may require some infrastructure modification, particularly to attract the less experienced and confident.\n\nAn Italian study assessed the impact of cycling for commute on major non-communicable diseases and public healthcare costs. Using a health economic assessment model, the study found a lower incidence of type 2 diabetes, acute myocardial infarction, and stroke in individuals that cycled compared to those that did not actively commute. This model estimated that public healthcare costs would reduce by 5% over a 10-year period. \n\nIllinois designated cycling as its official state exercise in 2007. \n\nThe effects of cycling on overall mental health have often been studied. A European study surveying participants from seven cities about self-perceived health based on primary modes of transportation reported favorable results in the bicycle use population. The bicycle use group reported predominantly good self-perceived health, less perceived stress, better mental health, better vitality, and less loneliness. The study attributed these results to possible economic benefits and senses of both independence and identity as a member of a cyclist community. An English study recruiting non-cyclist older adults aged 50 to 83 to participate as either conventional pedal bike cyclists, electrically assisted e-bike cyclists, or a non-cyclist control group in outdoor trails measured cognitive function through executive function, spatial reasoning, and memory tests and well-being through questionnaires. The study did not find significant differences in spatial reasoning or memory tests. It did, however, find that both cyclists groups had improved executive function and well-being, both with greater improvement in the e-bike group. This suggested that non-physical factors of cycling such as independence, engagement with the outdoor environment, and mobility play a greater role in improving mental health.\n\nA 15-month randomized controlled trial in the U.S. examined the impact of self-paced cycling on cognitive function in institutionalized older adults without cognitive impairment. Researchers used three cognitive assessments: Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Fuld object memory evaluation, and symbol digit modality test. The study found that long-term cycling for at least 15 minutes per day in older adults without cognitive impairment had a protective effect on cognition and attention.\n\nCycling has also been shown to be effective adjunct therapy in certain mental health conditions. \n\nCycling suffers from a perception that it is unsafe. This perception is not always backed by hard numbers, because of under reporting of crashes and lack of bicycle use data (amount of cycling, kilometers cycled) which make it hard to assess the risk and monitor changes in risks. In the UK, fatality rates per mile or kilometre are slightly less than those for walking. In the US, bicycling fatality rates are less than 2/3 of those walking the same distance. However, in the UK for example the fatality and serious injury rates per hour of travel are just over double for cycling than those for walking. \n\nDespite the risk factors associated with bicycling, cyclists have a lower overall mortality rate when compared to other groups. A Danish study in 2000 found that even after adjustment for other risk factors, including leisure time physical activity, those who did not cycle to work experienced a 39% higher mortality rate than those who did. \n\nInjuries (to cyclists, from cycling) can be divided into two types:\n\nAcute physical trauma includes injuries to the head and extremities resulting from falls and collisions. [ citation needed ] Most cycle deaths result from a collision with a car or heavy goods vehicle. Drivers are at fault in the majority of these crashes. Segregated cycling infrastructure reduces the rate of crashes between bicycles and motor vehicles. \n\nAlthough a majority of bicycle collisions occur during the day, bicycle lighting is recommended for safety when bicycling at night to increase visibility. \n\nOf a study of 518 cyclists, a large majority reported at least one overuse injury, with over one third requiring medical treatment. The most common injury sites were the neck (48.8%) and the knees (41.7%), as well as the groin/buttocks (36.1%), hands (31.1%), and back (30.3%). Women were more likely to suffer from neck and shoulder pain than men. \n\nMany cyclists suffer from overuse injuries to the knees, affecting cyclists at all levels. These are caused by many factors: \n\nOveruse injuries, including chronic nerve damage at weight bearing locations, can occur as a result of repeatedly riding a bicycle for extended periods of time. Damage to the ulnar nerve in the palm, carpal tunnel in the wrist, the genitourinary tract or bicycle seat neuropathy may result from overuse. Recumbent bicycles are designed on different ergonomic principles and eliminate pressure from the saddle and handlebars, due to the relaxed riding position.\n\nNote that overuse is a relative term, and capacity varies greatly between individuals. Someone starting out in cycling must be careful to increase length and frequency of cycling sessions slowly, starting for example at an hour or two per day, or a hundred miles or kilometers per week. Bilateral muscular pain is a normal by-product of the training process, whereas unilateral pain may reveal \"exercise-induced arterial endofibrosis\". Joint pain and numbness are also early signs of overuse injury.\n\nA Spanish study of top triathletes found those who cover more than 186 miles (300 km) a week on their bikes have less than 4% normal looking sperm , where normal adult males would be expected to have from 15% to 20%. \n\nMuch work has been done to investigate optimal bicycle saddle shape, size and position, and negative effects of extended use of less than optimal seats or configurations.\n\nExcessive saddle height can cause posterior knee pain, while setting the saddle too low can cause pain in the anterior of the knee. An incorrectly fitted saddle may eventually lead to muscle imbalance. A 25 to 35-degree knee angle is recommended to avoid an overuse injury. \n\nAlthough cycling is beneficial to health, men can be negatively affected by cycling more than three hours a week due to the significant weight on their perineum, an area located between the scrotum and the anus which hold some of the nerves and arteries that pass to the penis. This weight for continuous hours a week can cause men to experience numbness or tingling which can lead to them losing the ability to achieve an erection due to reduced blood flow; which 13% of males did experience in a study by Norwegian researchers who gathered data from 160 men participating in a long-distance bike tour. Fitting a proper sized seat can prevent this effect. [ unreliable medical source? ] In extreme cases, pudendal nerve entrapment can be a source of intractable perineal pain. Some cyclists with induced pudendal nerve pressure neuropathy gained relief from improvements in saddle position and riding techniques. \n\nThe National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has investigated the potential health effects of prolonged bicycling in police bicycle patrol units, including the possibility that some bicycle saddles exert excessive pressure on the urogenital area of cyclists, restricting blood flow to the genitals. Their study found that using bicycle seats without protruding noses reduced pressure on the groin by at least 65% and significantly reduced the number of cases of urogenital paresthesia. A follow-up found that 90% of bicycle officers who tried the no-nose seat were using it six months later. NIOSH recommends that riders use a no-nose bicycle seat for workplace bicycling. \n\nDespite rumors to the contrary, there is no scientific evidence linking cycling with testicular cancer . \n\nOne concern is that riding in traffic may expose the cyclist to higher levels of air pollution, especially cyclists regularly traveling on or along busy roads. Some authors have claimed this to be untrue, showing that the pollutant and irritant count within cars is consistently higher, presumably because of limited circulation of air within the car and due to the air intake being directly in the stream of other traffic. Other authors have found small or inconsistent differences in concentrations but claim that exposure of cyclists is higher due to increased minute ventilation and is associated with minor biological changes. A 2010 study estimated that the gained life expectancy from the health benefits of cycling (approximately 3–14 months gained) greatly exceeded the lost life expectancy from air pollution (approximately 0.8–40 days lost). However, a systematic review comparing the effects of air pollution exposure on the health of cyclists was conducted, but the authors concluded that the differing methodologies and measuring parameters of each study made it difficult to compare results and suggested a more holistic approach was needed to accomplish this. The significance of the associated health effect, if any, is unclear but probably much smaller than the health impacts associated with accidents and the health benefits derived from additional physical activity.",
  "The DARPA Grand Challenge is a prize competition for American autonomous vehicles , funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency , the most prominent research organization of the United States Department of Defense . Congress has authorized DARPA to award cash prizes to further DARPA's mission to sponsor revolutionary, high-payoff research that bridges the gap between fundamental discoveries and military use. The initial DARPA Grand Challenge in 2004 was created to spur the development of technologies needed to create the first fully autonomous ground vehicles capable of completing a substantial off-road course within a limited time. The third event, the DARPA Urban Challenge in 2007, extended the initial Challenge to autonomous operation in a mock urban environment. The 2012 DARPA Robotics Challenge , focused on autonomous emergency-maintenance robots, and new Challenges are still being conceived. The DARPA Subterranean Challenge was tasked with building robotic teams to autonomously map, navigate, and search subterranean environments. Such teams could be useful in exploring hazardous areas and in search and rescue. \n\nIn addition to the challenges in autonomous technology, DARPA has also conducted prize competitions in other areas of technology.\n\nFully autonomous vehicles have been an international pursuit for many years, from endeavors in Japan (starting in 1977), Germany ( Ernst Dickmanns and VaMP ), Italy (the ARGO Project), the European Union ( EUREKA Prometheus Project ), the United States of America, and other countries. DARPA funded the development of the first fully autonomous robot beginning in 1966 with the Shakey the robot project at Stanford Research Institute , now SRI International. The first autonomous ground vehicle capable of driving on and off roads was developed by DARPA as part of the Strategic Computing Initiative beginning in 1984 leading to demonstrations of autonomous navigation by the Autonomous Land Vehicle and the Navlab . \n\nThe Grand Challenge was the first long distance competition for driverless cars in the world; other research efforts in the field of driverless cars take a more traditional commercial or academic approach. The U.S. Congress authorized DARPA to offer prize money ($1 million) for the first Grand Challenge to facilitate robotic development, with the ultimate goal of making one-third of ground military forces autonomous by 2015. Following the 2004 event, Dr. Tony Tether , the director of DARPA, announced that the prize money had been increased to $2 million for the next event, which was claimed on October 9, 2005. The first, second and third places in the 2007 Urban Challenge received $2 million, $1 million, and $500,000, respectively. 14 new teams have qualified in year 2015. \n\nThe competition was open to teams and organizations from around the world, as long as there was at least one U.S. citizen on the roster. Teams have participated from high schools, universities, businesses and other organizations. More than 100 teams registered in the first year, bringing a wide variety of technological skills to the race. In the second year, 195 teams from 36 U.S. states and 4 foreign countries entered the race.\n\nThe first competition of the DARPA Grand Challenge was held on March 13, 2004 in the Mojave Desert region of the United States, along a 150-mile (240 km) route that follows along the path of Interstate 15 from just before Barstow, California to just past the California – Nevada border in Primm .\nNone of the robot vehicles finished the route. Carnegie Mellon University 's Red Team and car Sandstorm (a converted Humvee) traveled the farthest distance, completing 11.78 km (7.32 mi) of the course before getting hung up on a rock after making a switchback turn. No winner was declared, and the cash prize was not given. Therefore, a second DARPA Grand Challenge event was scheduled for 2005.\n\nThe second competition of the DARPA Grand Challenge began at 6:40 am on October 8, 2005. All but one of the 23 finalists in the 2005 race surpassed the 11.78 km (7.32 mi) distance completed by the best vehicle in the 2004 race. Five vehicles successfully completed the 212 km (132 mi) course:\n\nVehicles in the 2005 race passed through three narrow tunnels and negotiated more than 100 sharp left and right turns. The race concluded through Beer Bottle Pass, a winding mountain pass with a sheer drop-off on one side and a rock face on the other. Although the 2004 course required more elevation gain and some very sharp switchbacks (Daggett Ridge) were required near the beginning of the route, the course had far fewer curves and generally wider roads than the 2005 course.\n\nThe natural rivalry between the teams from Stanford and Carnegie Mellon ( Sebastian Thrun , head of the Stanford team was previously a faculty member at Carnegie Mellon and colleague of Red Whittaker , head of the CMU team) was played out during the race. Mechanical problems plagued H1ghlander before it was passed by Stanley. Gray Team's entry was a miracle in itself, as the team from the suburbs of New Orleans was caught in Hurricane Katrina a few short weeks before the race. The fifth finisher, Terramax, a 30,000 pound entry from Oshkosh Truck , finished on the second day. The huge truck spent the night idling on the course, but was particularly nimble in carefully picking its way down the narrow roads of Beer Bottle Pass.\n\nThe third competition of the DARPA Grand Challenge, known as the \"Urban Challenge\", took place on November 3, 2007 at the site of the now-closed George Air Force Base (currently used as Southern California Logistics Airport ), in Victorville, California ( Google map ). The course involved a 96 km (60 mi) urban area course, to be completed in less than 6 hours. Rules included obeying all traffic regulations while negotiating with other traffic and obstacles and merging into traffic.\n\nUnlike previous challenges, the 2007 Urban Challenge organizers divided competitors into two \"tracks\", A and B. All Track A and Track B teams were part of the same competition circuit, but the teams chosen for the Track A program received US $1 million in funding. These 11 teams largely represented major universities and large corporate interests such as CMU teaming with GM as Tartan Racing, Stanford teaming with Volkswagen , Virginia Tech teaming with TORC Robotics as VictorTango, Oshkosh Truck , Honeywell , Raytheon , Caltech , Autonomous Solutions , Cornell University , and MIT . One of the few independent entries in Track A was the Golem Group . DARPA has not publicly explained the rationale behind the selection of Track A teams.\n\nTeams were given maps sparsely charting the waypoints that defined the competition courses. At least one team, Tartan Racing, enhanced the maps through the insertion of additional extrapolated waypoints for improved navigation. A debriefing paper published by Team Jefferson illustrates graphically the contrast between the course map it was given by DARPA and the course map used by Tartan Racing. \n\nTartan Racing claimed the $2 million prize with their vehicle \"Boss\", a Chevy Tahoe. The second-place finisher earning the $1 million prize was the Stanford Racing Team with their entry \"Junior\", a 2006 Volkswagen Passat. Coming in third place was team VictorTango, winning the $500,000 prize with their 2005 Ford Escape hybrid, \"Odin\". MIT placed 4th, with Cornell University and University of Pennsylvania / Lehigh University also completing the course.\n\nThe six teams that successfully finished the entire course:\n\nWhile the 2004 and 2005 events were more physically challenging for the vehicles , the robots operated in isolation and only encountered other vehicles on the course when attempting to pass. The Urban Challenge required designers to build vehicles able to obey all traffic laws while they detect and avoid other robots on the course. This is a particular challenge for vehicle software , as vehicles must make \"intelligent\" decisions in real time based on the actions of other vehicles. Other than previous autonomous vehicle efforts that focused on structured situations such as highway driving with little interaction between the vehicles, this competition operated in a more cluttered urban environment and required the cars to perform sophisticated interactions with each other, such as maintaining precedence at a 4-way stop intersection. \n\nThe DARPA Robotics Challenge is an ongoing competition focusing on humanoid robotics. The primary goal of the program is to develop ground robotic capabilities to execute complex tasks in dangerous, degraded, human-engineered environments. It launched in October 2012, and hosted the Virtual Robotics Competition in June 2013. Two more competitions are planned: the DRC Trials in December 2013, and the DRC Finals in December 2014.\n\nUnlike prior Challenges, the construction of the \"vehicles\" will not be part of the scope of the Robotics Challenge. In August 2012 DARPA announced Boston Dynamics would act as sole source for the robots to be used in the challenge, awarding them a contract to develop and build 8 identical robots based on the PETMAN project for the software teams to use. The amount contracted was $10,882,438 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract and work is expected to be completed by Aug. 9, 2014. \n\nOn April 22, 2013, DARPA awarded a $1 million prize to \"Ground Systems\", a 3-person team with members in Ohio, Texas and California, as the winner of the Fast Adaptable Next-Generation Ground Vehicle (FANG) Mobility/Drivetrain Challenge. Team Ground Systems' final design submission received the highest score when measured against the established requirements for system performance and manufacturability. Since the beginning of the first FANG Challenge on January 14, 2013, more than 1,000 participants within more than 200 teams used the META design tools and the VehicleFORGE collaboration platform developed by Vanderbilt University in Nashville , Tennessee , to design and simulate the performance of thousands of potential mobility and drivetrain subsystems. The goal of the FANG program is to test the specially developed META design tools, model libraries and the VehicleFORGE platform, which were created to significantly compress the design-to-production time of a complex defense system. \n\nThe DARPA Subterranean Challenge tasked teams, consisting of university and corporate entities from around the world, to build robotic systems and virtual solutions to autonomously map, navigate, and search subterranean environments. Such areas can be difficult and dangerous for humans, making robotic teams a desirable option for exploration and search and rescue operations. These environments pose significant challenges to robots as well, including a lack of lighting, dripping water, thick smoke, cluttered or irregularly shaped environments and potential loss of GPS capabilities and communications with their handlers. The Challenge was meant to help close gaps in four technical areas: autonomy, perception, networking and mobility. \n\nThe Challenge started in September 2018 and consisted of a Systems Competition (in which teams compete with physical robots) and a Virtual Competition (in which teams compete in a virtual environment in the ROS Gazebo virtual simulator). The competition was split into three stages (Development Stage, Circuit Stage, and Finals Stage. The SubT Challenge consisted of four events, the Tunnel Circuit (August 2019), which was held at an experimental mine in Pittsburgh, PA; the Urban Circuit (February 2020), which featured an abandoned nuclear power plant in Elma, WA; the Cave Circuit (November 2020), which was held virtual only due to the COVID-19 Pandemic; and the Final Event (September 2021), which featured elements from all three domains (tunnel urban underground, and natural cave networks was held in Louisville, KY. \n\nTeams came from 11 countries (Australia, Canada, the Czech Republic, England, Germany, Norway, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States) and 20 universities. On September 24, 2021, Team CERBERUS won the Final Systems Competition using four ANYmal C legged systems. Australia’s Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) team came in second to Team CERBERUS, with an equal number of points, but a slightly slower time. Team Dynamo won the Final Virtual Competition. \n\nOne important strategy was to build a team of robots with diverse capabilities. With a mix of navigational capabilities such as treads, wheels, rotors and legs, robots were able to navigate a variety of spaces. Different types of robots have different capabilities. Walking robots can deal with uneven terrain such as stairs and piles of rubble. Robots with wheels or treads can carry heavier payloads, including large batteries, and operate for a longer time. “Marsupials” can carry other robots, including small flying robots which have short battery lives. Flying robots can be strategically deployed to map large or difficult-to-access spaces. Using diverse detection instruments, such as lights, radar, sonar and thermal imaging, enables a team of robots and their handlers to gather information about air and visibility conditions and respond to a broader range of conditions. \n\nBecause conditions can interfere with communications between robots and their handlers, the teams that developed robots with some degree of autonomy were most successful at the challenge task of mapping and searching a complex subterranean space. Such robots could explore on their own, and then return to radio contact with each other and their handlers to exchange information about what they had found.\nAustralia’s CSIRO team even designed its robots to make cooperative decisions about what tasks to undertake. For example, a robot that was too large to fit into a corridor could notify other robots that it existed, so that a smaller robot could explore there. A robot exploring an area could also for a communications node to be dropped to expand the contact area. A robot deep in a cavern could relay information back to a robot closer to the surface, which could more quickly walk back to a point where it could report the information to the human operators. This changed the way in which humans worked with the robots: the human operator used the control system to set goals and direct overall strategy, leaving the robots to assess on-the-ground conditions and choose how to get the job done. \n\nIn early 2020, three teams were expected to compete by rapidly launching a small satellite payload into orbit, with minimal notification, from two different launch sites (this requirement was later, when there was only one competitor left in the Challenge, relaxed so that the launches should use different launch pads, but could use the same launch site ) – one just days after the other – for an opportunity to win prizes. The prizes of the Challenge are: All teams that qualify for the competition would receive $400,000. Each team to successfully carry out an orbital launch gets a prize of $2 million, and is eligible to try to make a second launch in rapid succession. The second launches of the teams are scored (based on combination of time to launch, mass launched and orbital accuracy, etc.); the winning team gets $10 million, second prize is $9 million, and third prize $8 million. The pool of launch sites for the Challenge originally consisted of 8 launch locations; in the end, only Pacific Spaceport Complex – Alaska was used for an attempted launch.\n\nThe Challenge was announced on 18 April 2018, and on 10 April 2019, three finalist teams who would be attempting to launch rockets were announced: Virgin Orbit , Vector Launch and Astra (although at the time it was not published that the third finalist was Astra; the company was referred only as a \"stealth startup\"). In the autumn of 2019, both Vector and Virgin dropped out of the competition, Vector because of financial problems and Virgin because it wanted to focus on other customers than DARPA. The final remaining team, Astra, attempted to launch their Astra Rocket 3.0 for the Challenge from Pacific Spaceport Complex – Alaska in late February and early March 2020, but several launch attempts were all called off due to weather and technical difficulties. With the only team left in the competition failing to launch their rocket in the time frame set by DARPA, the Challenge was called off 2 March 2020 with no winner of the DARPA Launch Challenge. The $12 million prize pool went unclaimed. No rocket launch was performed by any contender of the DARPA Launch Challenge. \n\nA technology paper and source code for the computer vision machine learning component of the 2005 Stanford entry has been published. \n\n2007 Urban Challenge teams employed a variety of different software and hardware combinations for interpreting sensor data, planning, and execution. Some examples:",
  "Scouting for Boys: A handbook for instruction in good citizenship is a book on Boy Scout training, published in various editions since 1908. Early editions were written and illustrated by Robert Baden-Powell with later editions being extensively rewritten by others. The book was originally a manual for self-instruction in observation, tracking and woodcraft skills as well as self-discipline and self-improvement, about the British Empire and duty as citizens with an eclectic mix of anecdotes and unabashed personal observations and recollections. It is pervaded by a degree of moral proselytizing and references to the author's own exploits. It is based on his boyhood experiences, his experience with the Mafeking Cadet Corps during the Second Boer War at the siege of Mafeking , and on his experimental camp on Brownsea Island , England.\n\nScouting for Boys (1908) was Baden-Powell's rewrite of his earlier book Aids to Scouting (1899) with many youth training ideas openly taken from The Birch Bark Roll of the Woodcraft Indians (1906) written by Ernest Thompson Seton , who later became the Chief Scout of the Boy Scouts of America . Aids to Scouting was mostly a written explanation of the military scouting and self-reliance skills lessons Baden-Powell had learned from Frederick Russell Burnham , the British Army Chief of Scouts, but following the siege of Mafeking this military handbook unexpectedly became popular with many youth groups and educators, like Charlotte Mason , in Britain. At Mafeking, Baden-Powell's adjutant had recruited and trained boys aged 12–15 as cadets and during the siege they acted as postmen, messengers, and later to carry the wounded, to free men for fighting. Upon his return to England, following the Second Boer War , Baden-Powell learned some British schools had been using Aids to Scouting to teach observation and deduction . In 1906, Seton discussed youth training ideas with Baden-Powell and shared with him a copy of The Birch Bark Roll of the Woodcraft Indians . Soon after, Baden-Powell decided to revise Aids to Scouting into a book for boys. Several friends supported Baden-Powell, including Sir William Alexander Smith , founder of the Boys' Brigade , Cyril Arthur Pearson , who owned newspapers and printing presses, and the novelist Maria Fetherstonhaugh , who provided a quiet Wimbledon house where he could write. Baden-Powell wrote a draft, then called Boy Patrols , which he used and tested with 22 boys for one week at camp on Brownsea Island in the summer of 1907, where Pearson's literary editor Percy Everett assisted. \n\nScouting for Boys was published in six fortnightly instalments of approximately 70 pages each, from January to March 1908. They were produced by Pearson's printer, Horace Cox. These six publications were a success and, as planned, were issued in book form on 1 May 1908. Although Aids to Scouting strongly influenced the book, Scouting for Boys presents Scouting from the perspective of outdoorsmen and explorers rather than military men, and it adds the Scout Oath, Scout Law, honours and games for youth. The book was revised and an enormous variety of editions were published. Many of these editions were edited by others and, far beyond mere editing, whole sections were written by authors other than Baden-Powell. The book was a best seller upon release, and, in its various editions, is claimed to have become one of the best-selling books in history. Scouting for Boys has been translated into many languages. In 1948, editions of the book were still selling 50,000 copies annually. Only in 1967 was a decline noted by the publisher and in the last decades of the 20th century the book came to be seen as a period curiosity even by the Scout Movement. It is claimed to be the fourth bestselling book of the 20th century. A realistic estimate is that approximately 4 million copies of the UK edition have been sold. Extrapolating this to 87 different language editions worldwide, historic world sales of Scouting for Boys can be estimated at 100 to 150 million copies since 1908. \n\nIn her introduction to the 2005 edition, Elleke Boehmer criticises the book saying \"the text was deeply scored through with a contemporary class prejudice which would have been off-putting to non-middle-class readers, as captured in the sharp aphorism that bees form a 'model community, for they respect their Queen and kill their unemployed' (p. 117) Character observation in many ways meant reading for the signs of working-class poverty.\" \n\nScouting for Boys has been published in over thirty consecutive editions by London based C. Arthur Pearson Ltd. , and it is translated to all the major languages of the world. Estimatedly, over 100 million books have been printed, making it rank high in the list of best-selling books . The internet page www.scoutingforboysroundtheworld.org has identified more than 300 different editions and included them in a database accessible via this internet page. Users can also add missing editions to the database themselves.\n\nAll parts of the six installments in 1908 have the title Scouting for Boys in big capitals. With a listed price of ' 4d . net', it was affordable to many boys, many of whom would have been at work, as the school-leaving age was 14. Authorship is attributed thus: 'by B-P (Lieut. Gen. Baden Powell C.B.)' (sic).\n\nMost chapters start with hints to instructors. All chapters have campfire yarns , appealing to boys, most contain sections with games and activities, and they close with recommendations for books to read. \n\nThe first installment contains pages 3 to 70. It provides the basic details of Scouting.\n\nThe second part covers pages 71 to 142. It contains chapter II on tracking and chapter III on woodcraft, each with three camp fire yarns.\n\nThe third part covers pages 143 to 206. It contains chapter IV on camp life, and chapter V on campaigning.\n\nThe fourth part covers pages 207 to 270. It contains chapter VI Endurance for Scouts, or How to be strong , and chapter VII Chivalry of the knights.\n\nThe fifth part covers pages 271 to 334. It contains chapter VIII Saving life, or how to deal with accidents , and chapter IX Patriotism, or our duties as citizens.\n\nThe sixth part covers pages 335 to 398. It contains Notes to instructors and Scouting games, practices, and displays .\n\nCopyright to Scouting for Boys expired on 31 December 2011, at the end of the 70th year after the death of its author on 8 January 1941 and the book is now in the public domain . Baden-Powell had given his copyright to the book to The Scout Association which owned the copyright in the UK, until it expired. The Boy Scouts of America was granted a copyright licence by Baden-Powell himself for their Boy Scout Handbook , written during the BSA's formal founding in 1910. ",
  "An online magazine is a magazine published on the Internet , through bulletin board systems and other forms of public computer networks. One of the first magazines to convert from a print magazine format to an online only magazine was the computer magazine Datamation . Some online magazines distributed through the World Wide Web call themselves webzines . An ezine (also spelled e- zine ) is a more specialized term appropriately used for small magazines and newsletters distributed by any electronic method, for example, by email. \n\nSome social groups may use the terms cyberzine and hyperzine when referring to electronically distributed resources. Similarly, some online magazines may refer to themselves as \"electronic magazines\", \"digital magazines\", or \"e-magazines\" to reflect their readership demographics or to capture alternative terms and spellings in online searches. An online magazine shares some features with a blog and also with online newspapers , but can usually be distinguished by its approach to editorial control. Magazines typically have editors or editorial boards who review submissions and perform a quality control function to ensure that all material meets the expectations of the publishers (those investing time or money in its production) and the readership.\n\nMany large print publishers now provide digital reproduction of their print magazine titles through various online services for a fee. These service providers also refer to their collections of these digital format products as online magazines, and sometimes as digital magazines. Online magazines representing matters of interest to specialists or societies for academic subjects, science, trade, or industry are typically referred to as online journals .\n\nMany general interest online magazines provide free access to all aspects of their online content, although some publishers have opted to require a subscription fee to access premium online article and/or multimedia content. Online magazines may generate revenue based on targeted search ads to website visitors, banner ads ( online display advertising ), affiliations to retail web sites, classified advertisements, product-purchase capabilities, advertiser directory links, or alternative informational, commercial purpose.\n\nDue to their low cost and initial non-mainstream targets, the original online magazines, e-zines and disk magazines (or diskmags), may be seen as a disruptive technology to traditional publishing houses. The high cost of print publication and large Web readership has encouraged these publishers to embrace the World Wide Web as a marketing and content delivery system and another medium for delivering their advertisers' messages.\n\nIn the late 1990s, e-zine publishers began adapting to the interactive and informative qualities of the internet instead of simply duplicating print magazines on the web. Publishers of traditional print magazines and entrepreneurs with an eye to a potential readership in the millions started publishing online magazines. Salon.com , founded in July 1995 by David Talbot, was launched with considerable media exposure and today reports 5.8 million monthly unique visitors. In the 2000s, some webzines began appearing in a printed format to complement their online versions. ",
  "A stele ( / ˈ s t iː l i / STEE -lee ) or stela ( / ˈ s t iː l ə / STEE -lə ) [ note 1 ] is a stone or wooden slab, generally taller than it is wide, erected in the ancient world as a monument . The surface of the stele often has text, ornamentation, or both. These may be inscribed, carved in relief , or painted.\n\nStelae were created for many reasons. Grave stelae were used for funerary or commemorative purposes. Stelae as slabs of stone would also be used as ancient Greek and Roman government notices or as boundary markers to mark borders or property lines . Stelae were occasionally erected as memorials to battles. For example, along with other memorials, there are more than half-a-dozen steles erected on the battlefield of Waterloo at the locations of notable actions by participants in battle. \n\nA traditional Western gravestone (headstone, tombstone, gravestone, or marker) may technically be considered the modern equivalent of ancient stelae, though the term is very rarely applied in this way. Equally, stele-like forms in non-Western cultures may be called by other terms, and the words \"stele\" and \"stelae\" are most consistently applied in archaeological contexts to objects from Europe, the ancient Near East and Egypt, China, and sometimes Pre-Columbian America.\n\nSteles have also been used to publish laws and decrees, to record a ruler's exploits and honors, to mark sacred territories or mortgaged properties, as territorial markers, as the boundary steles of Akhenaton at Amarna , or to commemorate military victories. They were widely used in the ancient Near East , Mesopotamia , Greece , Egypt , Somalia , Eritrea , Ethiopia , and, most likely independently, in China and elsewhere in the Far East , and, independently, by Mesoamerican civilisations, notably the Olmec and Maya . \n\nThe large number of stelae, including inscriptions, surviving from ancient Egypt and in Central America constitute one of the largest and most significant sources of information on those civilisations, in particular Maya stelae . The most famous example of an inscribed stela leading to increased understanding is the Rosetta Stone , which led to the breakthrough allowing Egyptian hieroglyphs to be read. An informative stele of Tiglath-Pileser III is preserved in the British Museum . Two steles built into the walls of a church are major documents relating to the Etruscan language .\n\nStanding stones ( menhirs ), set up without inscriptions from Libya in North Africa to Scotland , were monuments of pre-literate Megalithic cultures in the Late Stone Age . The Pictish stones of Scotland, often intricately carved, date from between the 6th and 9th centuries.\n\nAn obelisk is a specialized kind of stele. The Insular high crosses of Ireland and Great Britain are specialized steles . Totem poles of North and South America that are made out of stone may also be considered a specialized type of stele. Gravestones , typically with inscribed name and often with inscribed epitaph , are among the most common types of stele seen in Western culture.\n\nMost recently, in the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe in Berlin , the architect Peter Eisenman created a field of some 2,700 blank steles. The memorial is meant to be read not only as the field, but also as an erasure of data that refer to memory of the Holocaust.\n\nEgyptian steles (or Stelae, Books of Stone) have been found dating as far back as the First Dynasty of Egypt . These vertical slabs of stone are used as tombstones, for religious usage, and to mark boundaries, and are most commonly made of limestone and sandstone, or harder kinds of stone such as granite or diorite, but wood was also used in later times. \n\nStele fulfilled several functions. There were votive, commemorative, and liminal or boundary stelae, but the largest group was the tomb stelae. Their picture area showed the owner of the stele, often with his family, and an inscription listed the name and titles of the deceased after a prayer to one, or several, of the gods of the dead and request for offerings. Less frequently, an autobiographical text provided additional information about the individual's life. \n\nIn the mastaba tombs of the Old Kingdom (2686 - 2181 BC), stelae functioned as false doors, symbolizing passage between the present and the afterlife, which allowed the deceased to receive offerings. These were both real and represented by formulae on the false door. \n\nLiminal, or boundary, stele were used to mark size and location of fields and the country's borders. Votive stelae were exclusively erected in temples by pilgrims to pay homage to the gods or sacred animals. Commemorative stelae were placed in temples by the pharaoh, or his senior officials, detailing important events of his reign. Some of the most widely known Egyptian stelae include: the Kamose Stelae, recounting the defeat of the Hyksos ; the Victory Stele , describing the campaigns of the Nubian pharaoh Piye as he reconquered the country; the Restoration Stele of Tutankhamun (1336 - 1327 BC), detailing the religious reforms enacted after the Amarna period; and the Merneptah Stele , which features the first known historical mention of the Israelites . In Ptolemaic times (332 - 30 BC), decrees issued by the pharaoh and the priesthood were inscribed on stelae in hieroglyphs, demotic script and Greek, the most famous example of which is the Rosetta Stone . \n\nUrartian steles were freestanding stone obelisks that served a variety of purposes, erected in the Iron Age kingdom which existed in the Armenian Highlands of modern Armenia , Turkey and Iran between the 9th and 6th centuries BC. Some were located within temple complexes, set within monumental rock-cut niches (such as the niche of the Rock of Van , discovered by Marr and Orbeli in 1916 ), or erected beside tombs. Others stood in isolated positions, such as the Kelashin Stele , and had a commemorative function or served as boundary markers. Although sometimes plain, most bore a cuneiform inscription that would detail the stele's function or the reasons for its erection. The stele from Van's \"western niche\" contained annals of the reign of Sarduri II , with events detailed yearly and with each year separated by the phrase \"For the God Haldi I accomplished these deeds\". Urartian steles are sometimes found reused as Christian Armenian gravestones or as spolia in Armenian churches - Maranci suggests this reuse was a deliberate desire to capitalize on the potency of the past. Some scholars have suggested Urartian steles may have influenced the development of the Armenian khachkar . \n\nGreek funerary markers, especially in Attica, had a long and evolutionary history in Athens. From public and extravagant processional funerals to different types of pottery used to store ashes after cremation, visibility has always been a large part of Ancient Greek funerary markers in Athens. Regarding stelai (Greek plural of stele), in the period of the Archaic style in Ancient Athens (600 BC) stele often showed certain archetypes of figures, such as the male athlete. Generally their figures were singular, though there are instances of two or more figures from this time period. Moving into the 6th and 5th centuries BC, Greek stelai declined and then rose in popularity again in Athens and evolved to show scenes with multiple figures, often of a family unit or a household scene. One such notable example is the Stele of Hegeso. Typically grave stelai are made of marble and carved in relief, and like most Ancient Greek sculpture they were vibrantly painted. For more examples of stelai, the Getty Museum's published Catalog of Greek Funerary Sculpture is a valuable resource \n\nSteles (Chinese: bēi 碑 ) have been a major medium of stone inscription in China, the earliest examples dating from the Qin dynasty . Chinese steles are generally rectangular stone tablets upon which Chinese characters are carved intaglio with a funerary, commemorative, or edifying text. They can commemorate talented writers and officials, inscribe poems, portraits, or maps, and frequently contain the calligraphy of famous historical figures. In addition to their commemorative value, many Chinese steles are regarded as exemplars of traditional Chinese calligraphic scripts, especially the clerical script . \n\nChinese steles from before the Tang dynasty are rare: there are a handful from before the Qin dynasty , roughly a dozen from the Western Han , 160 from the Eastern Han , and several hundred from the Wei , Jin , Northern and Southern , and Sui dynasties . During the Han dynasty, tomb inscriptions ( 墓誌 , mùzhì ) containing biographical information on deceased people began to be written on stone tablets rather than wooden ones. \n\nErecting steles at tombs or temples eventually became a widespread social and religious phenomenon. Emperors found it necessary to promulgate laws, regulating the use of funerary steles by the population. The Ming dynasty laws, instituted in the 14th century by its founder the Hongwu Emperor , listed a number of stele types available as status symbols to various ranks of the nobility and officialdom: the top noblemen and mandarins were eligible for steles installed on top of a stone tortoise and crowned with hornless dragons , while the lower-level officials had to be satisfied with steles with plain rounded tops, standing on simple rectangular pedestals. \n\nSteles are found at nearly every significant mountain and historical site in China. The First Emperor made five tours of his domain in the 3rd century BC and had Li Si make seven stone inscriptions commemorating and praising his work, of which fragments of two survive. One of the most famous mountain steles is the 13 m (43 ft) high stele at Mount Tai with the personal calligraphy of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang commemorating his imperial sacrifices there in 725. \n\nA number of such stone monuments have preserved the origin and history of China's minority religious communities. The 8th-century Christians of Xi'an left behind the Xi'an Stele , which survived adverse events of the later history by being buried underground for several centuries. Steles created by the Kaifeng Jews in 1489, 1512, and 1663, have survived the repeated flooding of the Yellow River that destroyed their synagogue several times, to tell us something about their world. Chinese Muslims have a number of steles of considerable antiquity as well, often containing both Chinese and Arabic text.\n\nThousands of steles, surplus to the original requirements, and no longer associated with the person they were erected for or to, have been assembled in Xi'an's Stele Forest Museum , which is a popular tourist attraction. Elsewhere, many unwanted steles can also be found in selected places in Beijing, such as Dong Yue Miao, the Five Pagoda Temple, and the Bell Tower, again assembled to attract tourists and also as a means of solving the problem faced by local authorities of what to do with them. The long, wordy, and detailed inscriptions on these steles are almost impossible to read for most are lightly engraved on white marble in characters only an inch or so in size, thus being difficult to see since the slabs are often 3m or more tall.\n\nThere are more than 100,000 surviving stone inscriptions in China. However, only approximately 30,000 have been transcribed or had rubbings made, and fewer than those 30,000 have been formally studied. \n\nMaya stelae were fashioned by the Maya civilization of ancient Mesoamerica . They consist of tall sculpted stone shafts or slabs and are often associated with low circular stones referred to as altars, although their actual function is uncertain. Many stelae were sculpted in low relief, although plain monuments are found throughout the Maya region. The sculpting of these monuments spread throughout the Maya area during the Classic Period (250–900 AD), and these pairings of sculpted stelae and circular altars are considered a hallmark of Classic Maya civilization. The earliest dated stela to have been found in situ in the Maya lowlands was recovered from the great city of Tikal in Guatemala . During the Classic Period almost every Maya kingdom in the southern lowlands raised stelae in its ceremonial centre. \n\nStelae became closely associated with the concept of divine kingship and declined at the same time as this institution. The production of stelae by the Maya had its origin around 400 BC and continued through to the end of the Classic Period, around 900, although some monuments were reused in the Postclassic ( c. 900 –1521). The major city of Calakmul in Mexico raised the greatest number of stelae known from any Maya city , at least 166, although they are very poorly preserved.\n\nHundreds of stelae have been recorded in the Maya region, displaying a wide stylistic variation. Many are upright slabs of limestone sculpted on one or more faces, with available surfaces sculpted with figures carved in relief and with hieroglyphic text . Stelae in a few sites display a much more three-dimensional appearance where locally available stone permits, such as at Copán and Toniná . Plain stelae do not appear to have been painted nor overlaid with stucco decoration, but most Maya stelae were probably brightly painted in red, yellow, black, blue and other colours. \n\nKhmer inscriptions are a corpus of post-5th century historical texts engraved sometimes on steles, but more generally on materials such as stone and metal ware found in a wide range of mainland Southeast Asia ( Cambodia , Vietnam , Thailand and Laos ) and relating to the Khmer civilization. The study of Khmer inscriptions is known as Khmer epigraphy .\n\nKhmer inscriptions are the only local written sources for the study of ancient Khmer civilization.\n\nMore than 1,200 Khmer inscriptions of varying length have been collected. There was an 'explosion' of Khmer epigraphy from the seventh century, with the earliest recorded Khmer stone inscription dating from 612 AD at Angkor Borei .\n\nOgham stones are vertical grave and boundary markers, erected at hundreds of sites in Ireland throughout the first millennium AD, bearing inscriptions in the Primitive Irish language. They have occasionally been described as \"steles.\" \n\nThe Horn of Africa contains many stelae. In the highlands of Ethiopia and Eritrea , the Axumites erected a number of large stelae, which served a religious purpose in pre-Christian times. One of these granite columns is the largest such structure in the world, standing at 90 feet. \n\nAdditionally, Tiya is one of nine megalithic pillar sites in the central Gurage Zone of Ethiopia. As of 1997, 118 stele were reported in the area. Along with the stelae in the Hadiya Zone, the structures are identified by local residents as Yegragn Dingay or \"Gran's stone\", in reference to Imam Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Ghazi (Ahmad \"Gurey\" or \"Gran\"), ruler of the Adal Sultanate . \n\nThe stelae at Tiya and other areas in central Ethiopia are similar to those on the route between Djibouti City and Loyada in Djibouti . In the latter area, there are a number of anthropomorphic and phallic stelae, which are associated with graves of rectangular shape flanked by vertical slabs. The Djibouti-Loyada stelae are of uncertain age, and some of them are adorned with a T-shaped symbol. \n\nNear the ancient northwestern town of Amud in Somalia , whenever an old site had the prefix Aw in its name (such as the ruins of Awbare and Awbube ), it denoted the final resting place of a local saint. Surveys by A.T. Curle in 1934 on several of these important ruined cities recovered various artefacts , such as pottery and coins , which point to a medieval period of activity at the tail end of the Adal Sultanate's reign. Among these settlements, Aw Barkhadle is surrounded by a number of ancient stelae. Burial sites near Burao likewise feature old stelae. ",
  "The American Football League (AFL) All-Time Team was selected on January 14, 1970. The first and second teams were determined by a panel of members of the AFL's Hall of Fame Board of Selectors: ",
  "Language policy is both an interdisciplinary academic field and implementation of ideas about language use. Some scholars such as Joshua Fishman and Ofelia García consider it as part of sociolinguistics . On the other hand, other scholars such as Bernard Spolsky , Robert B. Kaplan and Joseph Lo Bianco argue that language policy is a branch of applied linguistics .\n\nAs a field, language policy is also known as language planning or language policy and planning, and is related to other fields such as language ideology , language revitalization , and language education , among others.\n\nLanguage policy has been defined in a number of ways. According to Kaplan and Baldauf (1997), \"A language policy is a body of ideas, laws, regulations, rules and practices intended to achieve the planned language change in the societies, group or system\" (p. xi ). Lo Bianco defines the field as \"a situated activity, whose specific history and local circumstances influence what is regarded as a language problem, and whose political dynamics determine which language problems are given policy treatment” (p. 152). McCarty (2011) defines language policy as \"a complex sociocultural process [and as] modes of human interaction, negotiation, and production mediated by relations of power. The 'policy' in these processes resides in their language-regulating power; that is, the ways in which they express normative claims about legitimate and illegitimate language forms and uses, thereby governing language statuses and uses\" (p. 8). \n\nLanguage policy is broad, but it can be categorized into three components. Spolsky (2004) argues, \"A useful first step is to distinguish between the three components of the language policy of a speech community: (1) its language practices – the habitual pattern of selecting among the varieties that make up its linguistic repertoire; (2) its language beliefs or ideology – the beliefs about language and language use; and (3) any specific efforts to modify or influence that practice by any kind of language intervention, planning, or management\" (p. 5). \n\nThe traditional scope of language policy concerns language regulation. This refers to what a government does either officially through legislation , court decisions or policy to determine how languages are used, cultivate language skills needed to meet national priorities or to establish the rights of individuals or groups to use and maintain languages.\n\nThe implementation of language policy varies from one state to another. This may be explained by the fact that language policy is often based on contingent historical reasons. Likewise, states also differ as to the degree of explicitness with which they implement a given language policy. The French Toubon law provides a good example of explicit language policy. The same may be said for the Charter of the French Language in Quebec . \n\nScholars such as Tollefson argue that language policy can create inequality:\n\n\"language planning-policy means the institutionalization of language as a basis for distinctions among social groups (classes). That is, language policy is one mechanism for locating language within social structure so that language determines who has access to political power and economic resources. Language policy is one mechanism by which dominant groups establish hegemony in language use\" (p. 16). \n\nMany countries have a language policy designed to favor or discourage the use of a particular language or set of languages. States, local authorities or pressure-groups can promote bilingual signage or can agitate for translations of newspaper articles. Although nations historically have used language policies most often to promote one official language at the expense of others, many countries now have policies designed to protect and promote regional and ethnic languages whose viability is threatened. Indeed, whilst the existence of linguistic minorities within a jurisdiction has often been considered to be a potential threat to internal cohesion, states also understand that providing language rights to minorities may be more in their long-term interest, as a means of gaining citizens' trust in the central government. \n\nThe preservation of cultural and linguistic diversity in today's world is a major concern to many scientists, artists, writers, politicians, leaders of linguistic communities, and defenders of linguistic human rights . More than half of the 6000 languages currently spoken in the world are estimated to be in danger of disappearing during the 21st century. Many factors affect the existence and usage of any given human language, including the size of the population of native speakers, its use in formal communication, and the geographical dispersion and the socio-economic weight of its speakers. National language policies can either mitigate or exacerbate the effects of some of these factors.\n\nFor example, according to Ghil'ad Zuckermann :\n\n\"Native tongue title and language rights should be promoted. The government ought to define Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander vernaculars as official languages of Australia. We must change the linguistic landscape of Whyalla and elsewhere. Signs should be in both English and the local indigenous language. We ought to acknowledge intellectual property of indigenous knowledge including language, music and dance.\" \n\nThere are many ways in which language policies can be categorized. Université Laval sociolinguist Jacques Leclerc elaborated the field for the French-language web site L'aménagement linguistique dans le monde (put on line by the CIRAL in 1999). The collecting, translating and classifying of language policies started in 1988 and culminated in the publishing of Recueil des législations linguistiques dans le monde (vol. I to VI) at Presses de l'Université Laval in 1994. The work, containing some 470 language-laws, and the research leading to publication, were subsidised by the Office québécois de la langue française . In April 2008, the web site presented the linguistic portrait and language policies in 354 States or autonomous territories in 194 recognised countries. \n\nDirections of language policies :\n\nSome case studies :",
  "Abu'l-Qâsem Ferdowsi Tusi (also Firdawsi , Persian : ابوالقاسم فردوسی توسی ; 940 – 1019/1025) was a Persian poet and the author of Shahnameh (\"Book of Kings\"), which is one of the world's longest epic poems created by a single poet, and the greatest epic of Persian-speaking countries . Ferdowsi is celebrated as one of the most influential figures of Persian literature and one of the greatest in the history of literature . \n\nExcept for his kunya ( ابوالقاسم – Abul-Qâsem , meaning 'father of Qasem') and his pen name ( فِردَوسی – Ferdowsī , meaning ' paradisic '), nothing is known with any certainty about his full name. According to Djalal Khaleghi-Motlagh, the information given by the 13th-century author Bundari about Ferdowsi's name should be taken as the most reliable. Bundari calls the poet al-Amir al-Hakim Abu'l-Qasem Mansur ibn al-Hasan al-Ferdowsi al-Tusi. [ a ] From an early period on, he has been referred to by different additional names and titles, the most common one being حکیم / Hakīm (\"philosopher\"). Based on this, his full name is given in Persian sources as حکیم ابوالقاسم فردوسی توسی / Hakīm Abol-Qâsem Ferdowsī Tusī . Due to the non-standardised transliteration from Persian into English, different spellings of his name are used in English works, including Firdawsi , Firdusi , Firdosi , Firdausi , etc. The Encyclopaedia of Islam uses the spelling Firdawsī , based on the standardised transliteration method of the German Oriental Society . The Encyclopædia Iranica , which uses a modified version of the same method (with a stronger emphasis on modern Persian intonations), gives the spelling Ferdowsī . [ b ] The modern Tajik transliteration of his name in Tajik Cyrillic is Ҳаким Абулқосим Фирдавсӣ Тӯсӣ ( Hakim Abdulqosim Firdavsí Tŭsí ).\n\nFerdowsi was born into a family of Persian landowners ( dehqans ) in 940 in the village of Paj, near the city of Tus , in the Khorasan region of the Samanid Empire , which is located in the present-day Razavi Khorasan province of northeastern Iran . Little is known about Ferdowsi's early life. The poet had a wife, who was probably literate and came from the same dehqan class. The dehqans were landowning Iranian aristocrats who had flourished under the Sasanian dynasty (the last pre-Islamic dynasty to rule Iran) and whose power, though diminished, had survived into the Islamic era which followed the Islamic conquests of the 7th century. The dehqans were attached to the pre-Islamic literary heritage, as their status was associated with it (so much so that dehqan is sometimes used as a synonym for \"Iranian\" in the Shahnameh ). Thus they saw it as their task to preserve the pre-Islamic cultural traditions, including tales of legendary kings. \n\nHe had a son, who died at the age of 37, and was mourned by the poet in an elegy which he inserted into the Shahnameh . \n\nThe Islamic conquests of the 7th century brought gradual linguistic and cultural changes to the Iranian Plateau. By the late 9th century, as the power of the caliphate had weakened, several local dynasties emerged in Greater Iran. Ferdowsi grew up in Tus, a city under the control of one of these dynasties, the Samanids, who claimed descent from the Sassanid general Bahram Chobin (whose story Ferdowsi recounts in one of the later sections of the Shahnameh ). The Samanid bureaucracy used the New Persian language, which had been used to bring Islam to the Eastern regions of the Iranian world and supplanted local languages, and commissioned translations of Pahlavi texts into New Persian. Abu Mansur Muhammad , a dehqan and governor of Tus, had ordered his minister Abu Mansur Mamari to invite several local scholars to compile a prose Shahnameh (\"Book of Kings\"), which was completed in 1010. Although it no longer survives, Ferdowsi used it as one of the sources of his epic. Samanid rulers were patrons of such important Persian poets as Rudaki and Daqiqi , and Ferdowsi followed in the footsteps of these writers. \n\nDetails about Ferdowsi's education are lacking. While it is likely that he learned Arabic in school, there is no evidence in the Shahnameh that he knew either Arabic or Pahlavi. \n\nFerdowsi was a Shiite Muslim, although varying views exist on what Shiite sect he belonged to. Khaleghi-Motlagh, following Theodor Nöldeke , notes that Ferdowsi displays a contradictory attitude towards religion in the Shahnameh : on the one hand, he shows a \"lenient\" attitude towards religion, but on the other hand, he believed that his sect was the \"only true Islamic one.\" Khaleghi-Motlagh concurs with Nöldeke that Ferdowsi was \"above all a deist and monotheist who at the same time kept faith with his forbears.\" Ferdowsi criticized philosophers and those who tried to prove the existence of God. He saw God's creation as the only evidence of His existence and believed everything in life to be the product of God's will. Khaleghi-Motlagh and others have suggested that a certain fatalism in Ferdowsi's work contradicts his \"absolute faith in the unicity and might of God,\" and that this may have been the legacy of the Zurvanism of the Sasanian period. \n\nIt is possible that Ferdowsi wrote some early poems which have not survived. He began work on the Shahnameh around 977, intending it as a continuation of the work of his fellow poet Daqiqi, who had been assassinated by his slave. Like Daqiqi, Ferdowsi employed the prose Shahnameh of Abd-al-Razzaq as a source. He received generous patronage from the Samanid prince Mansur and completed the first version of the Shahnameh in 994. When the Turkic Ghaznavids overthrew the Samanids in the late 990s, Ferdowsi continued to work on the poem, rewriting sections to praise the Ghaznavid Sultan Mahmud . Mahmud's attitude to Ferdowsi and how well he rewarded the poet are matters which have long been subject to dispute and have formed the basis of legends about the poet and his patron (see below). The Turkic Mahmud may have been less interested in tales from Iranian history than the Samanids. The later sections of the Shahnameh have passages which reveal Ferdowsi's fluctuating moods: in some he complains about old age, poverty, illness and the death of his son; in others, he appears happier. Ferdowsi finally completed his epic on 8 March 1010. Virtually nothing is known with any certainty about the last decade of his life. \n\nFerdowsi was buried in his own garden, burial in the cemetery of Tus having been forbidden by a local cleric who considered him a heretic. A Ghaznavid governor of Khorasan Afghanistan constructed a mausoleum over the grave and it became a revered site. The tomb , which had fallen into decay, was rebuilt between 1928 and 1934 by the Society for the National Heritage of Iran on the orders of Reza Shah , and has now become the equivalent of a national shrine. \n\nAccording to legend, Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni offered Ferdowsi a gold piece for every couplet of the Shahnameh he wrote. The poet agreed to receive the money as a lump sum when he had completed the epic. He planned to use it to rebuild the dykes in his native Tus. After thirty years of work, Ferdowsi finished his masterpiece. The sultan prepared to give him 60,000 gold pieces, one for every couplet, as agreed. However, the courtier whom Mahmud had entrusted with the money despised Ferdowsi, regarding him as a heretic, and he replaced the gold coins with silver. Ferdowsi was in the bath house when he received the reward. Finding it was silver and not gold, he gave the money away to the bath-keeper, a refreshment seller, and the slave who had carried the coins. When the courtier told the sultan about Ferdowsi's behaviour, he was furious and threatened to execute him. Ferdowsi fled to Khorasan , having first written a satire on Mahmud, and spent most of the remainder of his life in exile. Mahmud eventually learned the truth about the courtier's deception and had him either banished or executed. By this time, the aged Ferdowsi had returned to Tus . The sultan sent him a new gift of 60,000 gold pieces, but just as the caravan bearing the money entered the gates of Tus, a funeral procession exited the gates on the opposite side: the poet had died from a heart attack. \n\nFerdowsi's Shahnameh is the most popular and influential national epic in Iran and other Persian-speaking countries. The Shahnameh is the only surviving work by Ferdowsi regarded as indisputably genuine.\n\nHe may have written poems earlier in his life but they no longer exist. A narrative poem, Yūsof o Zolaykā (Joseph and Zuleika), was once attributed to him, but scholarly consensus now rejects the idea it is his. \n\nThere has also been speculation about the satire Ferdowsi allegedly wrote about Mahmud of Ghazni after the sultan failed to reward him sufficiently. Nezami Aruzi , Ferdowsi's early biographer, claimed that all but six lines had been destroyed by a well-wisher who had paid Ferdowsi a thousand dirhams for the poem. Introductions to some manuscripts of the Shahnameh include verses purporting to be the satire . Some scholars have viewed them as fabricated; others are more inclined to believe in their authenticity. \n\nFerdowsi is one of the undisputed giants of Persian literature . After Ferdowsi's Shahnameh , a number of other works similar in nature surfaced over the centuries within the cultural sphere of the Persian language . Without exception, all such works were based in style and method on Ferdowsi's Shahnameh , but none of them could quite achieve the same degree of fame and popularity as Ferdowsi's masterpiece. \n\nFerdowsi has a unique place in Persian history because of the strides he made in reviving and regenerating the Persian language and cultural traditions. His works are cited as a crucial component in the persistence of the Persian language, as those works allowed much of the tongue to remain codified and intact. In this respect, Ferdowsi surpasses Nizami , Khayyam , Asadi Tusi and other seminal Persian literary figures in his impact on Persian culture and language. [ citation needed ] Many modern Iranians see him as the father of the modern Persian language.\n\nFerdowsi in fact was a motivation behind many future Persian figures. One such notable figure was Reza Shah Pahlavi, who established an Academy of Persian Language and Literature , in order to attempt to remove Arabic and French words from the Persian language, replacing them with suitable Persian alternatives. In 1934, Reza Shah set up a ceremony in Mashhad , Khorasan , celebrating a thousand years of Persian literature since the time of Ferdowsi, titled \" Ferdowsi Millennial Celebration \", inviting notable European as well as Iranian scholars. Ferdowsi University of Mashhad is a university established in 1949 that also takes its name from Ferdowsi.\n\nFerdowsi's influence in the Persian culture is explained by John Andrew Boyle : \n\nThe library at Wadham College , Oxford University was named the Ferdowsi Library, and contains a specialised Persian section for scholars.",
  "A Bible society is a non-profit organization, usually nondenominational in makeup, devoted to translating , publishing, and distributing the Bible at affordable prices. In recent years they also are increasingly involved in advocating its credibility and trustworthiness in contemporary cultural life. Traditionally Bible society editions contain scripture, without any doctrinal notes or comments, although they may include non-sectarian notes on alternate translations of words, or variations in the different available manuscripts.\n\nThe production and distribution of bibles are issues that have engaged the attention of Christian leaders for centuries. In an extant letter, dated 331, Emperor Constantine requested Eusebius , bishop of Caesarea , to provide him with fifty copies of the Old and New Testaments for use in the principal churches in Constantinople. In 797, Charlemagne commissioned Alcuin to prepare an emended text of the Vulgate ; multiple copies of this text were created, not always accurately, in the famous writing schools at Tours . \n\nThe first book printed in Europe was the Latin Bible, and Copinger estimates that 124 editions of the Vulgate had been issued by the end of the 15th century. The Italian Bible was printed a dozen times before 1500, and eighteen editions of the German Bible had already been published before Martin Luther 's version appeared. From medieval time and then again accompanying the Protestant Reformation , there was a marked increase in interest in the scriptures . Notwithstanding the oppositional attitude adopted by the Roman Catholic Church at and after the Council of Trent (1545-1563), the translation and circulation of the Bible were undertaken with greater zeal, and in a more systematic fashion. \n\nThe Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in New England was incorporated by an ordinance of parliament in 1649, and reincorporated in 1661, after the Restoration . The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (SPCK) was founded 1698. It published the King James Version of the English Bible, and translated and published editions of the Bible in other British languages such as Welsh and Manx. Early in the 18th century it printed editions in Arabic, and promoted the first versions of the Bible in Tamil and Telugu, made by the Danish Lutheran missionaries whom it then supported in south India. The earliest New Testament published in 1767, and Old Testament 1801 in Scots Gaelic were published by the Society in Scotland for Propagating Christian Knowledge (SSPCK) founded in 1709.\n\nIn 1710, the Canstein Bible Institute for the mass production of affordable Bibles was founded in Halle , Brandenburg-Prussia , by Karl Hildebrand, Count of Canstein . \n\nThe first organisation called \"The Bible Society\" was formed in 1779 to distribute Bibles to soldiers and seamen, which became the Naval and Military Bible Society in 1804. The French Bible Society, instituted in 1792, came to an end in 1803, owing to the Napoleonic Revolution. Leftover funds were given to Bible production in Welsh. The modern Bible society movement dates back to the foundation of the British and Foreign Bible Society in 1804 when a group of Christians sought to address the problem of a lack of affordable Bibles in Welsh for Welsh-speaking Christians. Although perceived as Protestant, from the early days the British and Foreign Bible Society was officially ecumenical, and allowed inclusion of the Apocrypha . As a reaction to the occasional inclusion of these books and other issues, the Trinitarian Bible Society was founded in 1831. Pope Gregory XVI in his 1844 encyclical letter Inter praecipuas condemned both Bible societies and \"the publication, dissemination, reading, and possession of vernacular translations of Sacred Scriptures\" which did not abide by the general rules and decrees of the Catholic Church, and subsequently Catholics did not officially participate in the Society. \n\nThe British and Foreign Bible Society extended its work to England, India, Europe and beyond. Auxiliary branches were set up all over the world which later became Bible societies in their own right. Today the United Bible Societies co-ordinates the work of these separate Bible societies. Each Bible society is a non-denominational Christian network which works to translate, revise, print, and distribute affordable Bibles in their own land, according to the demands of all the churches in that land. Nowadays Bible societies print Bibles according to the canons of the countries they are in e.g. Protestant , Catholic or Orthodox , and inter-confessional versions. Bible societies work with other Christian agencies and Bible translations are done on an ecumenical basis, through the Forum of Bible Agencies International. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn the United States, Bible societies flourished in the first half of the 19th century. In addition to the American Bible Society and the International Bible Society (now \"Biblica\"), a number of state and regional Bible societies were established prior to the American Civil War and to this day, they have remained active, they distribute Bibles and other works of religious literature to prisons, hospitals and shelters. Most of these regional societies are affiliated with the National Association of State and Regional Bible Societies . The oldest Bible society in the United States is the Pennsylvania Bible Society , it was founded in 1808. The Bible society movement spread west as far as Chicago where the Chicago Bible Society was founded in 1840, making it only five years younger than the city itself. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe United Bible Societies (UBS) is a worldwide association of Bible societies. As of September 2019 the UBS has 148 member or associated Bible societies, working in more than 200 countries and territories. They include:\n\nAttribution:",
  "A provisional government , also called an interim government , an emergency government , a transitional government or provisional leadership , is a temporary government formed to manage a period of transition, often following state collapse , revolution , civil war , or some combination thereof.\n\nProvisional governments generally come to power in connection with a grave crisis that has caused the previous government to suddenly and irreversibly collapse, such as economic collapse , civil war , defeat in a foreign war , revolution , or the death of a long-serving authoritarian ruler. Questions of democratic transition and state-building are often fundamental to the formation and policies of such governments.\n\nProvisional governments maintain power until a new government can be appointed by a regular political process, which is generally an election . They may be involved with defining the legal structure of subsequent regimes, guidelines related to human rights and political freedoms , the structure of the economy , government institutions , and international alignment. \n\nProvisional governments differ from caretaker governments , which are responsible for governing within an established parliamentary system and serve temporarily after an election, vote of no confidence or cabinet crisis , until a new government can be appointed. Caretaker governments operate entirely within the existing constitutional framework and most countries tightly circumscribe their authority, in contrast to provisional governments, which often operate in the absence of any elected legislature and usually enjoy expansive, if temporary, powers.\n\nIn opinion of Yossi Shain and Juan J. Linz, provisional governments can be classified to four groups: \n\nThe establishment of provisional governments is frequently tied to the implementation of transitional justice . Provisional governments may be responsible for implementing transitional justice measures as part of the path to establishing a permanent government structure.\n\nThe early provisional governments were created to prepare for the return of royal rule. Irregularly convened assemblies during the English Revolution , such as Confederate Ireland (1641–49), were described as \"provisional\". The Continental Congress , a convention of delegates from 13 British colonies on the east coast of North America became the provisional government of the United States in 1776, during the American Revolutionary War . The government shed its provisional status in 1781, following ratification of the Articles of Confederation , and continued in existence as the Congress of the Confederation until it was supplanted by the United States Congress in 1789.\n\nThe practice of using \"provisional government\" as part of a formal name can be traced to Talleyrand 's government in France in 1814. In 1843, American pioneers in the Oregon Country , in the Pacific Northwest region of North America established the Provisional Government of Oregon —as the U.S. federal government had not yet extended its jurisdiction over the region—which existed until March 1849. The numerous provisional governments during the Revolutions of 1848 gave the word its modern meaning: A liberal government established to prepare for elections.\n\nNumerous provisional governments have been established since the 1850s.\n\nAs of 2024, seven African countries currently have provisional governments: Libya , Sudan , South Sudan , Burkina Faso , Guinea , Mali and Niger .\n\nAs of 2024 in the Americas, only Haiti is formally administered by a provisional government.\n\nAs of 2024 in Asia, Bangladesh , Myanmar , the State of Palestine (under both Fatah and Hamas ), Syria , and Yemen currently have provisional governments.\n\nProvisional governments were also established throughout Europe as occupied nations were liberated from Nazi occupation by the Allies .\n\nAs of 2024 in Europe, only Belarus , South Ossetia , and territories of Russia and Ukraine occupied by each other during the Russian invasion of Ukraine have provisional governments. The former two were established by the opposition in parallel with the government of the Republic of South Ossetia–State of Alania and the government of the Republic of Belarus , while the latter two exist as a occupation governments in opposition to the government of Russia and the government of Ukraine , respectively.",
  "Jean-Baptiste Lully [ a ] (28 or 29 November [ O.S. 18 or 19 November] 1632 – 22 March 1687) was a French composer, dancer and instrumentalist of Italian birth, who is considered a master of the French Baroque music style. Best known for his operas, he spent most of his life working in the court of Louis XIV of France and became a French subject in 1661. He was a close friend of the playwright Molière , with whom he collaborated on numerous comédie-ballets , including L'Amour médecin , George Dandin ou le Mari confondu , Monsieur de Pourceaugnac , Psyché and his best known work, Le Bourgeois gentilhomme .\n\nLully was born on November 28 or 29, 1632, in Florence , Grand Duchy of Tuscany , to Lorenzo Lulli and Caterina Del Sera, a Tuscan family of millers. His general education and his musical training during his youth in Florence remain uncertain, but his adult handwriting suggests that he manipulated a quill pen with ease. He used to say that a Franciscan friar gave him his first music lessons and taught him guitar. He also learned to play the violin. In 1646, dressed as Harlequin during Mardi Gras and amusing bystanders with his clowning and his violin, the boy attracted the attention of Roger de Lorraine, chevalier de Guise, son of Charles, Duke of Guise , who was returning to France and was looking for someone to converse in Italian with his niece, Mademoiselle de Montpensier ( la Grande Mademoiselle ). Guise took the boy to Paris, where the fourteen-year-old entered Mademoiselle's service; from 1647 to 1652 he served as her \"chamber boy\" ( garçon de chambre ). He probably honed his musical skills by working with Mademoiselle's household musicians and with composers Nicolas Métru , François Roberday and Nicolas Gigault . The teenager's talents as a guitarist, violinist, and dancer quickly won him the nicknames \"Baptiste\", and \" le grand baladin \" (great street-artist). \n\nWhen Mademoiselle was exiled to the provinces in 1652 after the rebellion known as the Fronde , Lully \"begged his leave ... because he did not want to live in the country.\" The princess granted his request. \n\nBy February 1653, Lully had attracted the attention of young Louis XIV , dancing with him in the Ballet royal de la nuit . By March 16, 1653, Lully had been made royal composer for instrumental music. His vocal and instrumental music for court ballets gradually made him indispensable. In 1660 and 1662 he collaborated on court performances of Francesco Cavalli 's Xerse and Ercole amante . When Louis XIV took over the reins of government in 1661, he named Lully superintendent of the royal music and music master of the royal family. In December 1661, the Florentine was granted letters of naturalization. Thus, when he married Madeleine Lambert (1643–1720), the daughter of the renowned singer and composer Michel Lambert in 1662, Giovanni Battista Lulli declared himself to be \"Jean-Baptiste Lully, escuyer [ squire ], son of Laurent de Lully, gentilhomme Florentin [Florentine gentleman]\". The latter assertion of high birth was an untruth. The couple had six children who survived past childhood: Catherine-Madeleine, Louis , Jean-Baptiste , Gabrielle-Hilarie, Jean-Louis and Louis-Marie. \n\nFrom 1661 on, the trios and dances he wrote for the court were promptly published. As early as 1653, Louis XIV made him director of his personal violin orchestra, known as the Petits Violons (\"Little Violins\"), which was proving to be open to Lully's innovations, as contrasted with the Twenty-Four Violins or Grands Violons (\"Great Violins\"), who only slowly were abandoning the polyphony and divisions of past decades. When he became surintendant de la musique de la chambre du roi in 1661, the Great Violins also came under Lully's control. He relied mainly on the Little Violins for court ballets. \n\nLully's collaboration with the playwright Molière began with Les Fâcheux [ fr ] in 1661, when Lully provided a single sung courante, added after the work's premiere at Nicolas Fouquet 's sumptuous chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte . Their collaboration began in earnest in 1664 with Le Mariage forcé . More collaborations followed, some of them conceived for fetes at the royal court, and others taking the form of incidental music ( intermèdes ) for plays performed at command performances at court and also in Molière's Parisian theater.\n\nIn 1672, Lully broke with Molière, who turned to Marc-Antoine Charpentier . Having acquired Pierre Perrin 's opera privilege, Lully became the director of the Académie Royale de Musique , that is, the royal opera, which performed in the Palais-Royal . Between 1673 and 1687, he produced a new opera almost yearly and fiercely protected his monopoly over that new genre.\n\nAfter Queen Marie-Thérèse 's death in 1683 and the king's secret marriage to Mme de Maintenon , devotion came to the fore at court. The king's enthusiasm for opera dissipated; he was annoyed by Lully's dissolute life and homosexual encounters. Lully had avoided getting too close to the secret homosexual grouping that had gathered in the court around the Duc de Vendôme , the Comte de Tallard and the Duc de Gramont . But in 1685 he was accused of improper relations with a page boy living in his household called Brunet. Brunet was removed after a police raid, and Lully escaped punishment. However, to show his general displeasure, Louis XIV made a point of not inviting Lully to perform Armide at Versailles the following year.\n\nLully died from gangrene , having struck his foot with his long conducting staff during a performance of his Te Deum to celebrate Louis XIV's recovery from surgery. He refused to have his toe amputated. This resulted in gangrene propagating through his body and ultimately infecting the greater part of his brain, causing his death. [ citation needed ] He died in Paris and was buried in the church of Notre-Dame-des-Victoires , where his tomb with its marble bust can still be seen. All three of his sons ( Louis Lully , Jean-Baptiste Lully fils , and Jean-Louis Lully ) had musical careers as successive surintendants of the King's Music.\n\nLully himself was posthumously given a conspicuous place on Titon du Tillet 's Parnasse François (\"the French Mount Parnassus \"). In the engraving, he stands to the left, on the lowest level, his right arm extended and holding a scroll of paper with which to beat time. (The bronze ensemble has survived and is part of the collections of the Museum of Versailles.) Titon honored Lully as:\n\nthe prince of French musicians, ... the inventor of that beautiful and grand French music, such as our operas and the grand pieces for voices and instruments that were only imperfectly known before him. He brought it [music] to the peak of perfection and was the father of our most illustrious musicians working in that musical form. ... Lully entertained the king infinitely, by his music, by the way he performed it, and by his witty remarks. The prince was also very fond of Lully and showered him with benefits in a most gracious way. \n\nLully's music was written during the Middle Baroque period, 1650 to 1700. Typical of Baroque music is the use of the basso continuo as the driving force behind the music. The pitch standard for the French opera at the time was about 392 Hz for A above middle C, a whole tone lower than modern practice where A is usually 440 Hz . \n\nLully's music is known for its power, liveliness in its fast movements and its deep emotional character in its slower movements. Some of his most popular works are his passacailles ( passacaglias ) and chaconnes , which are dance movements found in many of his works such as Armide or Phaëton .\n\nThe influence of Lully's music produced a radical revolution in the style of the dances of the court itself. In the place of the slow and stately movements which had prevailed until then, he introduced lively ballets of rapid rhythm , often based on well-known dance types such as gavottes , menuets , rigaudons and sarabandes .\n\nThrough his collaboration with playwright Molière , a new music form emerged during the 1660s: the comédie-ballet which combined theater, comedy, incidental music and ballet. The popularity of these plays, with their sometimes lavish special effects, and the success and publication of Lully's operas and its diffusion beyond the borders of France, played a crucial role in synthesizing, consolidating and disseminating orchestral organization, scorings, performance practices, and repertory.\n\nThe instruments in Lully's music were: five voices of strings such as dessus (a higher range than soprano), haute-contre (the instrumental equivalent of the high tenor voice by that name), taille ( baritenor ), quinte , and basse , divided as follows: one voice of violins, three voices of violas, one voice of cello, and basse de viole (viole, viola da gamba). He also utilized guitar, lute , archlute , theorbo , harpsichord, organ, oboe, bassoon, recorder , flute, brass instruments (natural trumpet) and various percussion instruments ( castanets , timpani ). \n\nHe is often credited with introducing new instruments into the orchestra, but this legend needs closer scrutiny. He continued to use recorders in preference to the newer transverse flute, and the \"hautbois\" he used in his orchestra were transitional instruments, somewhere between shawms and so-called Baroque oboes . \n\nLully created French-style opera as a musical genre ( tragédie en musique or tragédie lyrique ). Concluding that Italian-style opera was inappropriate for the French language, he and his librettist, Philippe Quinault , a respected playwright, employed the same poetics that dramatists used for verse tragedies: the 12-syllable \" alexandrine \" and the 10-syllable \"heroic\" poetic lines of the spoken theater were used for the recitative of Lully's operas and were perceived by their contemporaries as creating a very \"natural\" effect. Airs, especially if they were based on dances, were by contrast set to lines of less than 8 syllables. Lully also forsook the Italian method of dividing musical numbers into separate recitatives and arias , choosing instead to combine and intermingle the two, for dramatic effect. He and Quinault also opted for quicker story development, which was more to the taste of the French public.\n\nLully is credited with the invention in the 1650s of the French overture , a form used extensively in the Baroque and Classical eras, especially by Johann Sebastian Bach and George Frideric Handel . \n\nLully's grand motets were written for the royal chapel, usually for vespers or for the King's daily Low Mass. Lully did not invent the genre, he built upon it. Grand motets often were psalm settings, but for a time during the 1660s Lully used texts written by Pierre Perrin , a neo-Latin poet. Lully's petit motets were probably composed for the nuns at the convent of the Assumption, rue Saint-Honoré.\n\nWhen Lully began dancing and composing for court ballets, the genre blossomed and markedly changed in character. At first, as composer of instrumental music for the King's chamber, Lully wrote overtures, dances, dance-like songs, descriptive instrumental pieces such as combats, and parody-like récits with Italian texts. He was so captivated by the French overture that he wrote four of them for the Ballet d'Alcidiane .\n\nThe development of his instrumental style can be discerned in his chaconnes . He experimented with all types of compositional devices and found new solutions that he later exploited to the full in his operas. For example, the chaconne that ends the Ballet de la Raillerie (1659) has 51 couplets plus an extra free part; in Le Bourgeois gentilhomme (1670) he added a vocal line to the chaconne for the Scaramouches .\n\nThe first menuets appear in the Ballet de la Raillerie (1659) and the Ballet de l'Impatience (1661). In Lully's ballets one can also see the emergence of concert music, for example, pieces for voice and instruments that could be excerpted and performed alone and that prefigure his operatic airs: \"Bois, ruisseau, aimable verdure\" from the Ballet des saisons (1661), the lament \"Rochers, vous êtes sourds\" and Orpheus's sarabande \"Dieu des Enfers\", from the Ballet de la naissance de Vénus (1665).\n\nIntermèdes became part of a new genre, the comédie-ballet , in 1661, when Molière described them as \"ornaments which have been mixed with the comedy\" in his preface to Les Fâcheux [ fr ] . \"Also, to avoid breaking the thread of the piece by these interludes, it was deemed advisable to weave the ballet in the best manner one could into the subject, and make but one thing of it and the play.\" The music for the premiere of Les Fâcheux was composed by Pierre Beauchamp , but Lully later provided a sung courante for act 1, scene 3. With Le Mariage forcé [ fr ] and La Princesse d'Élide (1664), intermèdes by Lully began to appear regularly in Molière's plays: for those performances there were six intermèdes, two at the beginning and two at the end, and one between each of the three acts. Lully's intermèdes reached their apogee in 1670–1671, with the elaborate incidental music he composed for Le Bourgeois gentilhomme and Psyché . After his break with Molière, Lully turned to opera; but he collaborated with Jean Racine for a fete at Sceaux in 1685, and with Campistron for an entertainment at Anet in 1686.\n\nMost of Molière's plays were first performed for the royal court.\n\nWith five exceptions, each of Lully's operas was described as a tragédie mise en musique , or tragedy set to music. The exceptions were: Bellérophon , Cadmus et Hermione , and Psyché , each called simply a tragédie ; and Les fêtes de l'Amour et de Bacchus , described as a pastorale , and Acis et Galathée , which is a pastorale héroïque . (The term tragédie lyrique came later.)\n\nWith Lully, the point of departure was always a verse libretto, in most cases by the verse dramatist Philippe Quinault . For the dance pieces, Lully would hammer out rough chords and a melody on the keyboard, and Quinault would invent words. For the recitative, Lully imitated the speech melodies and dramatic emphasis used by the best actors in the spoken theater. His attentiveness to transferring theatrical recitation to sung music shaped French opera and song for a century. \n\nUnlike Italian opera of the day, which was rapidly moving toward opera seria with its alternating recitative and da capo airs, in Lully's operas the focus was on drama, expressed by a variety of vocal forms: monologs, airs for two or three voices, rondeaux and French-style da capo airs where the chorus alternates with singers, sung dances, and vaudeville songs for a few secondary characters. In like manner the chorus performed in several combinations: the entire chorus, the chorus singing as duos, trios or quartets, the dramatic chorus, the dancing chorus.\n\nThe intrigue of the plot culminated in a vast tableau, for example, the sleep scene in Atys , the village wedding in Roland , or the funeral in Alceste . Soloists, chorus and dancers participated in this display, producing astonishing effects thanks to machinery. In contrast to Italian opera, the various instrumental genres were present to enrich the overall effect: French overture, dance airs, rondeaux , marches, \" simphonies \" that painted pictures, preludes, ritournelles . Collected into instrumental suites or transformed into trios, these pieces had enormous influence and affected instrumental music across Europe.\n\nThe earliest operas were performed at the indoor Bel Air tennis court (on the grounds of the Luxembourg Palace ) that Lully had converted into a theater. The first performance of later operas either took place at court, or in the theater at the Palais-Royal , which had been made available to Lully's Academy. Once premiered at court, operas were performed for the public at the Palais-Royal.",
  "The Fourteenth Amendment ( Amendment XIV ) to the United States Constitution was adopted on July 9, 1868, as one of the Reconstruction Amendments . Considered one of the most consequential amendments, it addresses citizenship rights and equal protection under the law at all levels of government. The Fourteenth Amendment was a response to issues affecting freed slaves following the American Civil War , and its passage was bitterly contested. States of the defeated Confederacy were required to ratify it to regain representation in Congress . The amendment, particularly its first section, is one of the most litigated parts of the Constitution, forming the basis for landmark Supreme Court decisions, such as Brown v. Board of Education (1954; prohibiting racial segregation in public schools ), Loving v. Virginia (1967; ending interracial marriage bans ), Roe v. Wade (1973; recognizing federal right to abortion until overturned in 2022 ), Bush v. Gore (2000; settling 2000 presidential election ), Obergefell v. Hodges (2015; extending right to marry to same-sex couples ), and Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard (2023; prohibiting affirmative action in most college admissions ).\n\nThe amendment's first section includes the Citizenship Clause , Privileges or Immunities Clause , Due Process Clause , and Equal Protection Clause . The Citizenship Clause broadly defines citizenship, superseding the Supreme Court's decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857), which held that Americans descended from African slaves could not become American citizens. The Privileges or Immunities Clause was interpreted in the Slaughter-House Cases (1873) as preventing states from impeding federal rights, such as the freedom of movement . The Due Process Clause builds on the Fifth Amendment to prohibit all levels of government from depriving people of life, liberty, or property without substantive and procedural due process . Additionally, the Due Process Clause supports the incorporation doctrine , by which portions of the Bill of Rights have been applied to the states. The Equal Protection Clause requires each state to provide equal protection under the law to all people, including non-citizens, within its jurisdiction .\n\nThe second section superseded the Three-Fifths Compromise , apportioning the House of Representatives and Electoral College using each state's adult male population. In allowing states to abridge voting rights \"for participation in rebellion, or other crime,\" this section approved felony disenfranchisement . The third section disqualifies federal and state candidates who \"have engaged in insurrection or rebellion,\" but in Trump v. Anderson (2024), the Supreme Court left its application to Congress for federal elections and state governments for state elections. The fourth section affirms public debt authorized by Congress while declining to compensate slaveholders for emancipation . The fifth section provides congressional power of enforcement , but Congress' authority to regulate private conduct has shifted to the Commerce Clause , while the anti-commandeering doctrine restrains federal interference in state law.\n\nSection 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.\n\nSection 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment formally defines United States citizenship and protects various civil rights from being abridged or denied by any state law or state action . In Shelley v. Kraemer (1948), the Supreme Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment's historical context of countering the discriminatory Black Codes of Southern states must be used in its interpretation. Primarily written by Representative John Bingham , Section 1 is the most frequently litigated part of the amendment, and this amendment is the most frequently litigated part of the Constitution. \n\nThe Citizenship Clause overruled the Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision that African Americans could not become citizens. The clause constitualized the Civil Rights Act of 1866's grant of citizenship to all born within the United States, except the children of foreign diplomats. Compared against European jus sanguinis laws that assign citizenship by one's parents, historians have framed the United States' Citizenship Clause as an extension of the Fourteenth Amendment's egalitarian principles. \n\nCongress' debate over the Citizenship Clause shows explicit rejection of Senator Edgar Cowan's anti-Romani sentiment , affirming that birthright citizenship cannot be revoked from children born to disfavored ethnic minorities. In United States v. Wong Kim Ark (1898), the Supreme Court confirmed that children born in the United States receive birthright citizenship, regardless of whether their parents are non-citizen immigrants. \n\nIn Elk v. Wilkins (1884), the Supreme Court interpreted the Citizenship Clause as granting birthright citizenship to all born within the jurisdiction of the United States and allowing Congress to establish alternative pathways for naturalization . Consistent with the views of the clause's author, Senator Jacob M. Howard , the Supreme Court held that because Indian reservations are not under the federal government's jurisdiction, Native Americans born on such land are not entitled to birthright citizenship. The 1887 Dawes Act offered citizenship to Native Americans who accepted private property as part of cultural assimilation , while the 1924 Indian Citizenship Act offered citizenship to all Native Americans born within the nation's territorial limits . \n\nIn Mackenzie v. Hare (1915), the Supreme Court upheld the Expatriation Act of 1907 , which dictated that all American women who voluntarily married a foreign alien renounced their American citizenship . Perez v. Brownell (1958) similarly held that Congress could designate voting in foreign elections or draft evasion as renunciations of citizenship. However, in Afroyim v. Rusk (1967) and Vance v. Terrazas (1980), the Supreme Court reversed itself, holding that renunciations of American citizenship must be formally expressed. \n\nIn January 2025, President Donald Trump issued Executive Order 14160 to deny birthright citizenship to children with parents of illegal or temporary immigration status . While this topic was not considered by the 39th Congress, nor has it been addressed by the Supreme Court, enforcement of the Executive Order has been blocked as unconstitutional by multiple federal judges. Furthermore, many of the freed slaves whose children were covered by the Citizenship Clause were illegal immigrants brought in violation of the 1807 Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves . \n\nThe Privileges or Immunities Clause was written to provide congressional power of enforcement to the similar Privileges and Immunities Clause of Article Four of the Constitution . In 1823, Supreme Court Justice Bushrod Washington decided Corfield v. Coryell , interpreting the latter clause as protecting the right to travel , seek habeas corpus , and hold property in multiple states, among other rights. In the Slaughter-House Cases (1873), the Supreme Court rejected arguments that the Privileges or Immunities Clause further incorporated the Bill of Rights against state governments or transferred police power to the federal government. In McDonald v. City of Chicago (2010) and Timbs v. Indiana (2019), Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas advocated transferring the incorporation doctrine from the Due Process Clause to the Privileges or Immunities Clause, but this has been criticized as a veiled attempt to restrict the rights of non-citizens within the United States. \n\nDue process has not been reduced to any formula; its content cannot be determined by reference to any code. The best that can be said is that, through the course of this Court's decisions, it has represented the balance which our Nation, built upon postulates of respect for the liberty of the individual, has struck between that liberty and the demands of organized society. If the supplying of content to this constitutional concept has of necessity been a rational process, it certainly has not been one where judges have felt free to roam where unguided speculation might take them. The balance of which I speak is the balance struck by this country, having regard to what history teaches are the traditions from which it developed as well as the traditions from which it broke. That tradition is a living thing. A decision of this Court which radically departs from it could not long survive, while a decision which builds on what has survived is likely to be sound. No formula could serve as a substitute, in this area, for judgment and restraint.\n\nThe Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment explicitly applies the Fifth Amendment's similar clause to state governments. In protecting all people against arbitrary denial of life, liberty, or property, courts have recognized both procedural and substantive due process . Procedural due process deals with the processes for restraining life, liberty, or property, such as the right to be notified of a hearing by a neutral decision-maker . In comparison, substantive due process involves the government's justification for engaging in those processes. In deciding whether legislation unconstitutionally infringes on one's liberty, most government acts are subject to rational basis review , under which the government must present a legitimate state interest . When the government infringes on fundamental rights, such as racial equality , strict scrutiny requires its actions to instead be narrowly tailored to address a compelling state interest. \n\nThe early 20th century has been referred to as the Lochner era for the Supreme Court's embrace of a freedom of contract in cases like Allgeyer v. Louisiana (1897) and Lochner v. New York (1905). While that freedom was ultimately curtailed in West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (1937), those early cases recognized substantive due process rights within the Due Process Clause. For example, Meyer v. Nebraska (1923) and Pierce v. Society of Sisters (1925) struck down anti-immigrant state education laws as violations of substantive due process. \n\nIn 1890, future Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis and his law partner, Samuel D. Warren II , published \" The Right to Privacy \" in the Harvard Law Review . While the article only advocated for tort actions to protect one's privacy, the Supreme Court later elevated privacy to a fundamental right, protecting contraceptive sales in Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), consensual sex in Lawrence v. Texas (2003), and same-sex marriage in Obergefell v. Hodges under substantive due process. In Roe v. Wade (1973), the Supreme Court recognized a substantive due process right to abortion , but that holding was overturned in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization (2022), which claimed that \"a right to abortion is not deeply rooted in the Nation’s history and traditions.\" \n\nPrior to the Fourteenth Amendment, the Supreme Court held in Barron v. Baltimore (1833) that the Bill of Rights only restrained the federal government. However, in Chicago, Burlington & Quincy Railroad Co. v. City of Chicago (1897), the Supreme Court applied the Fifth Amendment's Takings Clause to the eminent domain power of state governments under the Due Process Clause, beginning an ongoing process of incorporation. Legal scholar Akhil Reed Amar has argued that while Congress intended the Fourteenth Amendment to reverse the Barron decision, Representative Bingham expected incorporation to rely on the Privileges or Immunities Clause. The Supreme Court has explicitly rejected incorporation of the Fifth Amendment's Grand Jury Clause and Seventh Amendment , and it has never addressed the Third Amendment . \n\nThe Equal Protection Clause was written to constitutionalize the anti-discrimination principles of the Civil Rights Act of 1866 , preventing enforcement of the southern states' Black Codes . In Strauder v. West Virginia (1880), the Supreme Court recognized exclusion of African Americans from West Virginian juries as an unconstitutional infringement of this clause, triggering the 1866 law's provision to remove the underlying case to federal court. In Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886), the Supreme Court clarified that race-neutral laws administered in discriminatory ways were similarly unconstitutional. \n\nWhereas the Privileges or Immunities Clause refers to citizens, this clause refers to all people within the jurisdiction of the United States. Accordingly, in Plyler v. Doe (1982), the Supreme Court prohibited state governments from restricting public education on the basis of a child's immigration status. In that decision, Justice William J. Brennan Jr. noted that in Wong Wing v. United States (1896), the Supreme Court had already recognized illegal immigrants as within American jurisdiction for the purposes of due process rights . \n\nWhile the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause incorporates the Bill of Rights against state governments, the Fifth Amendment's similar clause has been used for reverse incorporation of the Equal Protection Clause against the federal government. In Bolling v. Sharpe (1954), the Supreme Court used this doctrine to prevent the federal government from maintaining segregated public schools in Washington, D.C. \n\nThe Supreme Court also decided whether foreign corporations are also within the jurisdiction of a state, ruling that a foreign corporation which sued in a state court in which it was not licensed to do business to recover possession of property wrongfully taken from it in another state was within the jurisdiction and could not be subjected to unequal burdens in the maintenance of the suit. When a state has admitted a foreign corporation to do business within its borders, that corporation is entitled to equal protection of the laws but not necessarily to identical treatment with domestic corporations. \n\nIn Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad (1886), the court reporter included a statement by Chief Justice Morrison Waite in the decision's headnote:\n\nThe court does not wish to hear argument on the question whether the provision in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which forbids a State to deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws, applies to these corporations. We are all of the opinion that it does. \n\nThis dictum , which established that corporations enjoyed personhood under the Equal Protection Clause, was repeatedly reaffirmed by later courts. It remained the predominant view throughout the twentieth century, though it was challenged in dissents by justices such as Hugo Black and William O. Douglas . Between 1890 and 1910, Fourteenth Amendment cases involving corporations vastly outnumbered those involving the rights of blacks, 288 to 19. \n\nIn Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), the Supreme Court held that the states could impose racial segregation so long as they provided similar facilities—the formation of the \" separate but equal \" doctrine. The Court went even further in restricting the Equal Protection Clause in Berea College v. Kentucky (1908), holding that the states could force private actors to discriminate by prohibiting colleges from having both black and white students. By the early 20th century, the Equal Protection Clause had been eclipsed to the point that Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. dismissed it as \"the usual last resort of constitutional arguments.\" \n\nThe Court held to the \"separate but equal\" doctrine for more than fifty years, despite numerous cases in which the Court itself had found that the segregated facilities provided by the states were almost never equal, until Brown v. Board of Education (1954) reached the Court. In Brown the Court ruled that even if segregated black and white schools were of equal quality in facilities and teachers, segregation was inherently harmful to black students and so was unconstitutional. Brown met with a campaign of resistance from white Southerners , and for decades the federal courts attempted to enforce Brown ' s mandate against repeated attempts at circumvention. This resulted in the controversial desegregation busing decrees handed down by federal courts in various parts of the nation. In Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School District No. 1 (2007), the Court ruled that race could not be the determinative factor in determining to which public schools parents may transfer their children. \n\nIn Hernandez v. Texas (1954), the Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment protects those beyond the racial classes of white or \" Negro \" and extends to other racial and ethnic groups, such as Mexican Americans in this case. In the half-century following Brown , the Court extended the reach of the Equal Protection Clause to other historically disadvantaged groups, such as women and illegitimate children, although it has applied a somewhat less stringent standard than it has applied to governmental discrimination on the basis of race ( United States v. Virginia (1996); Levy v. Louisiana (1968) ). \n\nThe Supreme Court ruled in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke (1978) that affirmative action in the form of racial quotas in public university admissions was a violation of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 ; however, race could be used as one of several factors without violating of the Equal Protection Clause or Title VI. In Gratz v. Bollinger (2003) and Grutter v. Bollinger (2003), the Court considered two race-conscious admissions systems at the University of Michigan . The university claimed that its goal in its admissions systems was to achieve racial diversity . In Gratz , the Court struck down a points-based undergraduate admissions system that added points for minority status, finding that its rigidity violated the Equal Protection Clause; in Grutter , the Court upheld a race-conscious admissions process for the university's law school that used race as one of many factors to determine admission. In Fisher v. University of Texas (2013), the Court ruled that before race can be used in a public university's admission policy, there must be no workable race-neutral alternative. In Schuette v. Coalition to Defend Affirmative Action (2014), the Court upheld the constitutionality of a state constitutional prohibition on the state or local use of affirmative action. \n\nReed v. Reed (1971), which struck down an Idaho probate law favoring men, was the first decision in which the Court ruled that arbitrary gender discrimination violated the Equal Protection Clause. In Craig v. Boren (1976), the Court ruled that statutory or administrative sex classifications had to be subjected to an intermediate standard of judicial review . Reed and Craig later served as precedents to strike down a number of state laws discriminating by gender. \n\nSince Wesberry v. Sanders (1964) and Reynolds v. Sims (1964), the Supreme Court has interpreted the Equal Protection Clause as requiring the states to apportion their congressional districts and state legislative seats according to \" one man, one vote \". The Court has also struck down redistricting plans in which race was a key consideration. In Shaw v. Reno (1993), the Court prohibited a North Carolina plan aimed at creating majority-black districts to balance historic under-representation in the state's congressional delegations. \n\nIn Pitts v. Black (1984) the Court established that, by refusing the homeless to register to vote, the New York City Board of Elections was in breach of the Equal Protection Clause. As a result, homeless voters were allowed to cast their ballots. \n\nThe Equal Protection Clause served as the basis for the decision in Bush v. Gore (2000), in which the Court ruled that no constitutionally valid recount of Florida's votes in the 2000 presidential election could be held within the needed deadline; the decision effectively secured Bush's victory in the disputed election. In League of United Latin American Citizens v. Perry (2006), the Court ruled that House majority leader Tom DeLay 's Texas redistricting plan intentionally diluted the votes of Latinos and thus violated the Equal Protection Clause. \n\nThe Eleventh Amendment provides state governments with sovereign immunity from federal lawsuits brought by citizens of other states, and in Hans v. Louisiana (1890), the Supreme Court held that it implies immunity from all lawsuits brought by private parties. In Fitzpatrick v. Bitzer (1976), the Supreme Court determined that Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment's congressional power of enforcement allows the federal government to limit state sovereign immunity. \n\nFurthermore, in Ex parte Young (1908), the Supreme Court held that private individuals could seek federal injunctions against state officials to prevent enforcement of unconstitutional laws, reasoning that unconstitutional conduct can never be a protected state action . Similarly, in Shelley v. Kraemer (1948), the Supreme Court held that while the federal government cannot prevent private parties from establishing racially discriminatory housing covenants , state and federal courts cannot enforce them. \n\nIn cases like Jackson v. Metropolitan Edison Co. (1974) and Flagg Bros., Inc. v. Brooks (1978), the Supreme Court clarified that state laws do not transform regulated businesses into state actors. Thus, private companies are free to engage in conduct that would be unconstitutional for state governments to pursue, though the federal government can prevent discriminatory private conduct under its Commerce Clause authority, and state governments may further regulate business operations. \n\nSection 2. Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors for President and Vice President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the Executive and Judicial officers of a State, or the members of the Legislature thereof, is denied to any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State.\n\nUnder Article I, Section 2, Clause 3 , the basis of representation of each state in the House of Representatives was determined by adding three-fifths of each state's slave population to its free population. Because slavery (except as punishment for crime) had been abolished by the Thirteenth Amendment , the freed slaves would henceforth be given full weight for purposes of apportionment. This situation was a concern to the Republican leadership of Congress, who worried that it would increase the political power of the former slave states, even as such states continued to deny freed slaves the right to vote. \n\nTwo solutions were considered:\n\nOn January 31, 1866, the House of Representatives voted in favor of a proposed constitutional amendment that would reduce a state's representation in the House in proportion to which that state used \"race or color\" as a basis to deny the right to vote in that state. The amendment failed in the Senate, partly because radical Republicans foresaw that states would be able to use ostensibly race-neutral criteria, such as educational and property qualifications, to disenfranchise the freed slaves without negative consequence. So the amendment was changed to penalize states in which the vote was denied to male citizens over twenty-one for any reason other than participation in crime. Later, the Fifteenth Amendment was adopted to guarantee the right to vote could not be denied based on race or color.\n\nThe effect of Section 2 was twofold:\n\nThe first reapportionment after the enactment of the Fourteenth Amendment occurred in 1873, based on the 1870 census . Congress appears to have attempted to enforce the provisions of Section 2, but was unable to identify enough disenfranchised voters to make a difference to any state's representation. In the implementing statute, Congress added a provision stating that\n\nshould any state, after the passage of this Act, deny or abridge the right of any of the male inhabitants of such State, being twenty-one years of age, and citizens of the United States, to vote at any election named in the amendments to the Constitution, article fourteen, section two, except for participation in rebellion or other crime, the number of Representatives apportioned in this act to such State shall be reduced in the proportion which the number of such male citizens shall have to the whole number of male citizens twenty-one years of age in such State. \n\nA nearly identical provision remains in federal law to this day. \n\nDespite this legislation, in subsequent reapportionments, no change has ever been made to any state's Congressional representation on the basis of the Amendment. Bonfield, writing in 1960, suggested that \"[t]he hot political nature of such proposals has doomed them to failure.\" Aided by this lack of enforcement, southern states continued to use pretexts to prevent many blacks from voting until the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 . \n\nIn the Fourth Circuit case of Saunders v Wilkins (1945), Saunders claimed that Virginia should have its Congressional representation reduced because of its use of a poll tax and other voting restrictions. The plaintiff sued for the right to run for Congress at large in the state, rather than in one of its designated Congressional districts. The lawsuit was dismissed as a political question . \n\nSome legal scholars have argued that Section 2 was implicitly repealed by the Fifteenth Amendment , although other legal scholars contest this claim, and the Supreme Court acknowledged Section 2 in later decisions.\n\nIn Minor v. Happersett (1875), the Supreme Court cited Section 2 as supporting its conclusion that the right to vote was not among the \"privileges and immunities of citizenship\" protected by Section 1.\n\nWhy this if it was not in the power of the legislature to deny the right of suffrage to some male inhabitants? And if suffrage was necessarily one of the absolute rights of citizenship, why confine the operation of the limitation to male inhabitants? Women and children are, as we have seen, \"persons.\" They are counted in the enumeration upon which the apportionment is to be made, but if they were necessarily voters because of their citizenship unless clearly excluded, why inflict the penalty for the exclusion of males alone? Clearly, no such form of words would have been elected to express the idea here indicated if suffrage was the absolute right of all citizens.\n\nWomen would not achieve equal voting rights throughout the U.S. until the adoption of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920.\n\nIn Richardson v. Ramirez (1974), the Court cited Section 2 in holding that Section 1's Equal Protection Clause does not prohibit states from disenfranchising felons . \n\nIn Hunter v. Underwood (1985), a case involving disenfranchising black misdemeanants , the Supreme Court concluded that the Tenth Amendment cannot save legislation prohibited by the subsequently enacted Fourteenth Amendment. More specifically the Court concluded that laws passed with a discriminatory purpose are not excepted from the operation of the Equal Protection Clause by the \"other crime\" provision of Section 2. The Court held that Section 2 \"was not designed to permit the purposeful racial discrimination ... which otherwise violates [Section] 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment.\" \n\nThere is debate among legal scholars as to whether Section 2 penalties would apply if a state legislature selected Presidential electors without—or in contravention of the result of—a popular election. \n\nAbolitionist leaders criticized the amendment's failure to specifically prohibit the states from denying people the right to vote on the basis of race. In 1937, Senator William Borah proposed a Substitute Constitutional Amendment, that included eliminating provisions that penalized those that supported the Confederacy. \n\nSection 2 protects the right to vote only of adult males, not adult females, making it the only provision of the Constitution to explicitly discriminate on the basis of sex. Section 2 was condemned by women's suffragists , such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony , who had long seen their cause as linked to that of black rights. The separation of black civil rights from women's civil rights split the two movements for decades. \n\nSection 3. No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof. But Congress may, by a vote of two-thirds of each House, remove such disability.\n\nThe Insurrection Clause disqualifies candidates for state or federal offices if they previously took an oath to support the Constitution when sworn into a public office but then engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the United States. Prior to the Fourteenth Amendment's adoption, Congress could only disqualify federal officials through impeachment and removal proceedings , as it did for Tennessee District Court Judge West Hughes Humphreys in 1862, and it held no authority over state offices. When Alexander H. Stephens , the former Vice President of the Confederate States of America , was elected to represent Georgia as a Senator in the 39th US Congress , the Republican-dominated Congress blocked him from taking office. To address the process of readmitting Confederate states, Congress established the Joint Committee on Reconstruction , whose work expanded beyond this clause to the overall Fourteenth Amendment. \n\nUtilizing Section 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment's congressional power of enforcement , the Enforcement Act of 1870 authorized federal prosecutors to issue writs of quo warranto to remove those disqualified by the Insurrection Clause from their political offices. In 1942, Congress' revisions of the US Code eliminated that provision. However, a section of the Confiscation Act of 1862 ( 18 U.S.C. § 2383 ), which precedes the Fourteenth Amendment, continues to disqualify anyone who \"incites, sets on foot, assists, or engages in any rebellion or insurrection against the authority of the United States.\" \n\nUnder Congress' authority to remove a disqualification with a two-thirds majority in each chamber, it passed the Amnesty Act in 1872 to exempt all Confederates except former Senators, Representatives, federal judges, military officers, cabinet officials, and ambassadors. In 1898, Congress exempted all people then disqualified by Section 3, but the Insurrection Clause continues to disqualify those who engage in subsequent insurrection or rebellion. During the 1970s, Congress posthumously lifted the disqualification of Confederate General-in-Chief Robert E. Lee and President Jefferson Davis , both of whom died before the 1898 amnesty. \n\nIn the only invocation of Section 3 between Reconstruction and 2021, Congress deemed Victor L. Berger disqualified by his conviction under the Espionage Act of 1917 and refused to seat him for the 66th US Congress . After that conviction was overturned based on judicial bias in Berger v. United States (1921), Berger represented Wisconsin's 5th congressional district for three terms. \n\nAfter President Donald Trump instigated the January 6 Capitol attack to disrupt the 2021 Electoral College vote count , a group of Colorado voters contested his presidential eligibility under Section 3, seeking to disqualify him from the state's ballots in the 2024 presidential election . In Trump v. Anderson (2024), the Supreme Court held that Section 5 delegates enforcement of the Insurrection Clause to Congress for federal and state officers, while allowing states to also impose disqualification on state candidates. Though the Electoral Count Reform Act of 2022 allows a fifth of members in each chamber of Congress to object to electors whose votes are not \"regularly given,\" which includes constitutional disqualification, no such objections were raised at the 2025 Electoral College vote count . \n\nA similar group of North Carolina voters sued in federal court to disqualify Representative Madison Cawthorn , but he lost the 2022 Republican primary for his district prior to a verdict. After New Mexico state courts removed Otero County commissioner Couy Griffin under Section 3, the Supreme Court declined his appeal, maintaining his disqualification from state and local offices. \n\nSection 4. The validity of the public debt of the United States, authorized by law, including debts incurred for payment of pensions and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection or rebellion, shall not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any State shall assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against the United States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such debts, obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void.\n\nSection 4 legitimizes all public debt appropriated by the Congress while rejecting debt associated with emancipation and the Confederacy . In the Gold Clause Cases , the Supreme Court held that Congress' authority over monetary policy allowed it to pass the Emergency Banking Act of 1933 , despite the law's practical effect of invalidating gold clauses , which allowed creditors to demand payment in gold . In the 21st century , constitutional law scholars have debated whether Section 4 authorizes the President to unilaterally raise the debt ceiling when Congress is unwilling. In 2011, former President Bill Clinton argued that Section 4 requires the Executive Branch to ignore the debt ceiling in its fulfillment of congressional appropriations . \n\nSection 5. The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.\n\nIn the Slaughter-House Cases , 83 U.S. (16 Wall.) 36 (1873), the Supreme Court opined that Section 5 empowered Congress to enforce the Equal Protection Clause on states that refused to repeal their Black Codes . However, the Civil Rights Cases (1883) held that the Fourteenth Amendment does not empower Congress to outlaw racial discrimination by private individuals. In Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States (1964), the Supreme Court upheld similar legislation under the Commerce Clause instead. \n\nIn Katzenbach v. Morgan (1966), the Supreme Court upheld Voting Rights Act of 1965's elimination of literacy tests by claiming that Congress could expand civil rights further than the judiciary. However, City of Boerne v. Flores (1997) rejected application of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act on state governments because it modified rights under the Free Exercise Clause , rather than protecting existing rights. \n\nIn the final years of the American Civil War and subsequent Reconstruction era , Congress repeatedly debated the rights of former slaves freed by the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation and the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment , the latter of which formally abolished slavery. Concerned that southern states would use their African American residents to enlarge their congressional representation while infringing on the civil rights of these freedmen , Republicans sought to discourage such disenfranchisement. \n\nThe Civil Rights Act of 1866 guaranteed citizenship without regard to race, color, or prior enslavement. The bill also guaranteed equal benefits and access to the law, attacking the discriminatory Black Codes passed by formerly Confederate states to restrict the movement, employment, self-defense, and legal rights of African Americans. Ignoring the urging of moderate Republicans, President Andrew Johnson vetoed the bill on March 27, 1866. In his veto message , Johnson framed the expansion of citizenship to African Americans as racial discrimination for leaving eleven southern states without congressional representation. Three weeks later, Johnson's veto was overridden and the measure became law. Unsure of their constitutional power to pass and enforce the law, especially if Southern Democrats retook Congress, the experience prompted drafting for a constitutional amendment to protect these civil rights. \n\nMore than seventy proposals for an amendment were drafted. In an extensive appendix to his dissenting opinion in Adamson v. California (1947), Justice Hugo Black detailed statements made by \"those who framed, advocated, and adopted the Amendment.\" In late 1865, the Joint Committee on Reconstruction proposed an amendment where states would only receive representation for their citizens with voting rights. This amendment passed the House, but it was blocked in the Senate by a coalition of Radical Republicans led by Charles Sumner , who considered the proposal a \"compromise with wrong,\" and Democrats opposed to black rights. Consideration turned to an amendment by Representative John A. Bingham of Ohio, enabling Congress to safeguard \"equal protection of life, liberty, and property\" of all citizens, but this proposal failed in the House. In April 1866, the Joint Committee forwarded a third version to Congress, which combined the prior proposals, rejected Confederate debt, and addressed voting by ex-Confederates. On May 29, 1866, the House passed this third version as House Resolution 127. The Senate amended Sections 2, 3, and 4, passing the modified version on June 8 by a 33–11 vote (five not voting). The House agreed to the Senate amendments on June 13 by a 138–36 vote (ten not voting). A concurrent resolution requesting the President to transmit the proposal to state governors was passed by both houses of Congress on June 18. \n\nThe Radical Republicans lamented that the Fourteenth Amendment only expanded civil rights while leaving political rights unaddressed. Thaddeus Stevens opined, \"I find that we shall be obliged to be content with patching up the worst portions of the ancient edifice, and leaving it, in many of its parts, to be swept through by the tempests, the frosts, and the storms of despotism.\" Abolitionist Wendell Phillips called it a \"fatal and total surrender,\" prompting the Fifteenth Amendment to prohibit government denial of the right to vote \"on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.\" \n\nOn June 16, 1866, Secretary of State William H. Seward transmitted the Fourteenth Amendment to state governors for ratification. After state legislatures in every formerly Confederate state except Tennessee refused to ratify it, Congress passed the Reconstruction Acts , which conditioned readmission on ratification. The first 28 states to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment were: \n\nAfter retaking the state legislatures of New Jersey and Ohio, Democrats rescinded their ratifications. On July 20, 1868, Seward certified that if recessions are invalid, the amendment became law with South Carolina's ratification as the 28th state. The following day, Congress rejected New Jersey's recession as \"scandalous\", declaring the Fourteenth Amendment as part of the Constitution and directing Seward to promulgate it as such, establishing that states cannot rescind their ratification: \n\nUpon receiving Georgia's ratification on July 27, Seward officially proclaimed the Fourteenth Amendment's adoption, listing all thirty ratifying states to prevent federal courts from recognizing recession. On October 16, 1868, three months after adoption, Oregon rescinded its ratification, but this had no impact on Fourteenth Amendment's validity. The Fourteenth Amendment was subsequently ratified by the following states: \n\nSince Ohio and New Jersey re-ratified the Fourteenth Amendment in 2003, all states that existed during Reconstruction have ratified the amendment. ",
  "The Massie Wireless Station ( PJ ) was built in Point Judith, Rhode Island , in 1907 and may be the oldest surviving working wireless station in the world. It is named for inventor Walter Wentworth Massie, president of the Massie Wireless Telegraph Company. The structure was moved to the New England Wireless and Steam Museum in 1983 where it is preserved as a technology museum and historic site . \n\nIn December 1902 the American De Forest Wireless Telegraph Company set up an earlier station in an existing house on a beach near Point Judith Light and another near Block Island Southeast Light , 15 miles (24 km) from the coast. By May 1903 they had successfully exchanged test messages. Messages were sent using Morse code . The stations were initially operated for the Providence Journal to send news stories to the island to be printed locally. Another goal was that passing ships could also send messages to the mainland which would then be relayed to Providence or New York City by telephone arriving hours before the ships reached port. At this time few places in the world were passed by so many ships as Block Island . The Block Island Wireless began publishing in July. At the time it was one of only two daily newspapers that printed dispatches sent by wireless. [ a ] The stations soon began sending messages (called \"aerograms\") for the public and charging a fee for the service. Initially, this experimental wireless service was only intermittently successful and the Block Island Wireless ceased publication at the end of August 1903. \n\nThe Journal, dissatisfied with the operation, offered management of the two stations to the recently formed Massie company. By 1904 the new equipment installed by Massie to replace the de Forest system enabled reliable two-way communication between the island and the mainland. The stations also provided communications to passenger steamships , particularly those of the Fall River Line . When Massie equipped the steamship Plymouth with wireless it was the first Long Island Sound steamer to have this capability. A Massie employee was stationed on the ship as the wireless operator. During initial tests the coast station was able to communicate with the ship at a distance of 33 miles (53 km). The crews on these ships considered Point Judith to be a dangerous point on this route. The shore station would advise them of adverse weather conditions such as fog hours before they reached it. The station would then aide in navigation as it passed. By 1905 with improvements to the station at Block Island it was able to detect signals from approaching ocean liners beyond the Nantucket Shoals Lightship 66 – a distance of 150 miles (240 km). \n\nIn 1907 Massie upgraded the Point Judith station by constructing a new building, the one that is preserved today, on the same site. The spark-gap transmitter operated at up to 2 kW power and was connected to an antenna tower that was 300 feet (91 m) tall. The wavelength [ b ] of transmission was listed as 400 metres (750 kHz) in 1907 and 325 metres (920 kHz) in 1912. \n\nThe steamships Santurce and Ligonaire collided off the coast of Cape Cod due to a thick fog in May 1910. The distress call CQD was received by the Point Judith station which then dispatched a wrecking tug to assist the ships. Wireless operators at the station kept a vigil in April 1912 listening for news from rescue vessels about the sinking of the RMS Titanic . \n\nOwnership of Massie's stations were then transferred to Marconi's Wireless Telegraph Company in August 1912. The sale included all shore and ship stations along with the contracts that the business held. Massie retained the rights to his patents and continued to maintain a shop with his laboratory equipment. The Point Judith station ceased operation shortly after that. [ c ] At the time it was shut down it had a range of up to 500 miles (800 km). \n\nIn 1917 a \"radiophone fog warning device\" was installed in the lighthouse adjacent to the shutdown Massie station. It transmitted a voice recording of the phrase \"Point Judith Light\" via wireless which could be received at a range of 8 miles (13 km). After three repetitions of this it would then transmit \"you are getting closer; keep off\" at lower power with a reception range of only 2 miles (3.2 km) miles. \n\nThe building then became a Western Union landline telegraph station until World War II . In subsequent decades it was used as a summer house .\n\nThe two original stations were joined by others to form a system along the southern coast of New England . Massie operated other stations from New Jersey to Massachusetts. The Point Judith station identified using the call letters \"PJ\". Other stations (and their call letters) that were part of the Massie system included:\n\nIn 1983 the building was moved to the New England Wireless and Steam Museum in East Greenwich, Rhode Island , to avoid demolition. The former site is now part of Roger Wheeler State Beach . The station is now situated within the Tillinghast Road Historic District , of which it is listed as a non-contributing building.\n\nThe original equipment from the station was donated to the Museum by Massie's family. The transmitter is functional and now operates at 850 metres (350 kHz) though it is not connected to an antenna. The station was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2001. \n\nThe Massie Wireless Club began amateur radio operation from the station in 2018 using the club call sign N1EPJ. \n\nAnother building at the museum contains a collection of various historic telegraph, radio, and television equipment. \n\nMedia related to Massie Wireless Station at Wikimedia Commons",
  "Jewellery design is the art or profession of designing and creating jewellery . It is one of civilization's earliest forms of decoration , dating back at least 7,000 years to the oldest-known human societies in Indus Valley Civilization , Mesopotamia , and Egypt . The art has taken many forms throughout the centuries, from the simple beadwork of ancient times to the sophisticated metalworking and gem-cutting known in the modern day. \n\nBefore an article of jewellery is created, design concepts are rendered followed by detailed technical drawings generated by a jewellery designer, a professional who is trained in the architectural and functional knowledge of materials, fabrication techniques, composition, wearability, and market trends.\n\nTraditional hand-drawing and drafting methods are still utilized in designing jewellery, particularly at the conceptual stage. However, a shift is taking place to computer-aided design programs. Whereas the traditionally hand-illustrated jewel is typically translated into wax or metal directly by a skilled craftsman, a CAD model is generally used as the basis for a CNC cut or 3D printed 'wax' pattern to be used in the rubber moulding or lost wax casting processes. [ citation needed ]\n\nOnce conceptual/ideation is complete, the design is rendered and fabricated using the necessary materials for proper adaptation to the function of the object. For example, 24K gold was used in ancient jewellery design because it was more accessible than silver as source material. Before the 1st century, many civilizations also incorporated beads into jewellery. Once the discovery of gemstones and gem cutting became more readily available, the art of jewellery ornamentation and design shifted. The earliest documented gemstone cut was done by Theophilus Presbyter (c. 1070–1125), who practised and developed many applied arts and was a known goldsmith. Later, during the 14th century, medieval lapidary technology evolved to include cabochons and cameos . \n\nEarly jewellery design commissions were often constituted by nobility or the church to honour an event or as wearable ornamentation. Within the structure of early methods, enameling and repoussé became standard methods for creating ornamental wares to demonstrate wealth, position, or power. These early techniques created a specific complex design element that later would forge the Baroque movement in jewellery design. \n\nTraditionally, jewels were seen as sacred and precious; however, since the 1900s, jewellery has started to be objectified. Additionally, no one trend can be seen in the history of jewellery design for this period. Throughout the 20th-century jewellery design underwent drastic and continual style changes: Art Nouveau (1900–1918), Art Deco (1919–1929), International Style & organicism (1929–1946), New Look & Pop (1947–1967), Globalization, Materialism, and Minimalism . Jewellery design trends are highly affected by the economic and social states of the time. The boundaries of styles and trends tend to blur together and the clear stylistic divisions of the past are harder to see during the 20th century. [ citation needed ]",
  "Hornussen is a former municipality in the district of Laufenburg in the canton of Aargau in Switzerland . On 1 January 2022 the former municipalities of Bözen , Effingen , Elfingen and Hornussen merged into the new municipality of Böztal .\n\nScattered archeological discoveries indicate that the land that would become Hornussen was lightly occupied during the Stone Age . During the Roman era , it was located on the important route over the Bözberg . However, the first mention of Hornussen is in 1281 as Hornescon . Until the 1802 Act of Mediation , all manor rights to the village were held by collegiate church of Säckingen . Until 1797 it was part of the Austrian- Habsburg Rheinfelden District. Since 1803 Hornussen has belong to the Canton of Aargau. Starting in the 15th century, the Manor of Hornussen had a formal special status within the Habsburg territory. The lord of the manor was the court of appeals for all of Säckingen and also the economic center of the district. This is evident in the administration building from 1595, and other late gothic houses along the Bözbergstrasse . Thanks to its location on the border to the Bernese Aargau, the village remained largely spared destruction by war, which is why many of the old buildings were preserved. \n\nThe rights to appoint the pastor of the church of St. Mauritius was held by the church at Säckingen. The present building dates from 1710 to 1712. As early as 1600 there was an annual pilgrimage from the village to Todtmoos in the Black Forest .\n\nBesides agriculture, the hospitality industry played a major role in Hornussen starting in the Middle Ages . It was a changing station for the first stage in crossing the Bözberg. In the 19th century the home straw plaiting industry entered the village, and at the end of the 19th century a popular wine was produced in the region. Hornussen was connected to the Bözbergbahn train line in 1875. Nevertheless, the migration to the industrial regions and overseas was considerable. In 1917, the predecessor of today's soap and cosmetics factory was founded. Since 1996, the A3 motorway has reduced the amount of through traffic in the village. In 2000, four fifths of the population of commuters. \n\nHornussen has an area, as of 2009 [update] , of 7.27 square kilometers (2.81 sq mi). Of this area, 3.56 km 2 (1.37 sq mi) or 49.0% is used for agricultural purposes, while 2.9 km 2 (1.1 sq mi) or 39.9% is forested. Of the rest of the land, 0.82 km 2 (0.32 sq mi) or 11.3% is settled (buildings or roads), 0.04 km 2 (9.9 acres) or 0.6% is either rivers or lakes. \n\nOf the built up area, housing and buildings made up 3.9% and transportation infrastructure made up 6.6%. Of the wooded land, 38.1% of the total land area is heavily forested and 1.8% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 34.1% is used for growing crops and 12.0% is pastures, while 2.9% is used for orchards or vine crops. All the water in the municipality is in rivers and streams. \n\nThe municipality is located in the Laufenburg district, in the upper Fricktal (Frick river valley). It grew out of the construction below the church hill during the 18th and 19th Centuries. It consists of the linear village of Hornussen. The municipalities of Bözen , Effingen , Elfingen , Hornussen and Zeihen are considering a merger some time in the future into a new municipality with an as yet (as of 2010 [update] ) undetermined name. \n\nThe blazon of the municipal coat of arms is Gules a Ploughshare inverted and on a Chief Argent three Mullets of Five of the first in fess. \n\nHornussen has a population (as of December 2020 [update] ) of 1,021. As of June 2009 [update] , 13.4% of the population are foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (1997–2007) the population has changed at a rate of 13.8%. Most of the population (as of 2000 [update] ) speaks German (91.3%), with Italian being second most common (2.5%) and Albanian being third (1.8%). \n\nThe age distribution, as of 2008 [update] , in Hornussen is; 79 children or 8.9% of the population are between 0 and 9 years old and 111 teenagers or 12.5% are between 10 and 19. Of the adult population, 119 people or 13.4% of the population are between 20 and 29 years old. 134 people or 15.1% are between 30 and 39, 152 people or 17.2% are between 40 and 49, and 130 people or 14.7% are between 50 and 59. The senior population distribution is 79 people or 8.9% of the population are between 60 and 69 years old, 42 people or 4.7% are between 70 and 79, there are 29 people or 3.3% who are between 80 and 89, and there are 10 people or 1.1% who are 90 and older. \n\nAs of 2000 [update] the average number of residents per living room was 0.61 which is about equal to the cantonal average of 0.57 per room. In this case, a room is defined as space of a housing unit of at least 4 m 2 (43 sq ft) as normal bedrooms, dining rooms, living rooms, kitchens and habitable cellars and attics. About 63.6% of the total households were owner occupied, or in other words did not pay rent (though they may have a mortgage or a rent-to-own agreement). \n\nAs of 2000 [update] , there were 25 homes with 1 or 2 persons in the household, 172 homes with 3 or 4 persons in the household, and 108 homes with 5 or more persons in the household. As of 2000 [update] , there were 315 private households (homes and apartments) in the municipality, and an average of 2.6 persons per household. In 2008 [update] there were 177 single family homes (or 45.6% of the total) out of a total of 388 homes and apartments. There were a total of 3 empty apartments for a 0.8% vacancy rate. As of 2007 [update] , the construction rate of new housing units was 11.7 new units per 1000 residents. \n\nIn the 2007 federal election the most popular party was the SVP which received 42.4% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the CVP (27.3%), the SP (10.4%) and the Green Party (5.9%). \n\nThe entire Swiss population is generally well educated. In Hornussen about 74.7% of the population (between age 25–64) have completed either non-mandatory upper secondary education or additional higher education (either university or a Fachhochschule ). Of the school age population (in the 2008/2009 school year [update] ), there are 54 students attending primary school in the municipality. \n\nThe historical population is given in the following table: \n\nThe former Säckinger Amtshaus at Hauptstrasse 37 is listed as a Swiss heritage site of national significance . The entire village of Hornussen is designated as part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites . \n\nAs of 2007 [update] , Hornussen had an unemployment rate of 2.42%. As of 2005 [update] , there were 42 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 15 businesses involved in this sector. 61 people are employed in the secondary sector and there are 8 businesses in this sector. 68 people are employed in the tertiary sector , with 21 businesses in this sector. \n\nIn 2000 [update] there were 430 workers who lived in the municipality. Of these, 358 or about 83.3% of the residents worked outside Hornussen while 116 people commuted into the municipality for work. There were a total of 188 jobs (of at least 6 hours per week) in the municipality. Of the working population, 18.8% used public transportation to get to work, and 54.6% used a private car. \n\nFrom the 2000 census [update] , 445 or 54.5% were Roman Catholic , while 219 or 26.8% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church . Of the rest of the population, there were 4 individuals (or about 0.49% of the population) who belonged to the Christian Catholic faith. ",
  "Posca was an ancient Roman drink made by mixing water and wine vinegar . Bracing but less nutritious and generally less palatable than wine, it was typically a drink for soldiers, the lower classes, and slaves.\n\nThe word posca is derived from either Latin potor 'to drink' or from Greek epoxos 'very sharp'. Because the Greeks lacked a word for posca , sources written in Greek, such as the Gospels and Plutarch, use the word οξος, oxos 'vinegar' in its place (translated as acetum in the Vulgate Bible). The word eventually migrated into Greek from about the sixth century AD onward as the Byzantine army continued the Roman tradition, drinking what they termed phouska . This word (sometimes rendered phouska ) may mean 'beer' in some contexts:\n\nWhat it certainly meant originally, like Latin posca , was vinegar-and-water, the regular beverage of the classical Roman army on bad days. Thus Aëtius gives, and Paul of Aegina repeats, a recipe for a \"palatable and laxative phouska \" which includes cumin , fennel seed, pennyroyal , celery seed, anise , thyme , scammony , and salt to be added to the basic liquid, which is explicitly called oxykraton \"vinegar diluted with water.\" \n\nThe widespread use of posca is attested by numerous mentions by ancient sources ranging from the Natural History of Pliny the Elder to the comedies of Plautus . When on campaign, generals and emperors could show their solidarity with common soldiers by drinking posca, as did Cato the Elder (as recorded by Plutarch ) and the emperor Hadrian , who according to the Historia Augusta \"actually led a soldier's life ... and, after the example of Scipio Aemilianus , Metellus and his own adoptive father Trajan cheerfully ate out of doors such camp-fare as bacon, cheese, and vinegar.\" A decree of AD 360 ordered that lower ranks of the army should drink posca and wine on alternate days. The most famous mention of posca is in the Gospels, where Jesus is given a sponge soaked in oxos (conventionally translated as \"vinegar\") during his crucifixion ; the Gospel of John mentions that it was given to him \"on hyssop .\" Vinegar drinks with herbs were also used as medicine. Recipes can be found in medical scriptures like the P. Oxy. 1384. ",
  "Beat music , British beat , or Merseybeat is a British popular music genre that developed around Liverpool in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The genre melded influences from British and American rock and roll , rhythm and blues , skiffle , traditional pop , and music hall . It rose to mainstream popularity in the United Kingdom and Europe by 1963 before spreading to North America in 1964 with the British Invasion . The beat style shaped popular music and youth culture through 1960s movements such as garage rock , folk rock and psychedelic music .\n\nThe exact origins of the terms 'beat music' and 'Merseybeat' are uncertain. \"Beat\" alludes to the driving rhythms adopted from rock and roll, R&B, and soul music—not the Beat Generation literary movement of the 1950s. As the initial wave of rock and roll subsided in the later 1950s, \"big beat\" music, later shortened to \"beat\", became a live dance alternative to the balladeers like Tommy Steele , Marty Wilde , and Cliff Richard who were dominating the charts. The German anthropologist and music critic Ernest Borneman , who lived in England from 1933 to 1960, claimed to have coined the term in a column in Melody Maker magazine to describe the British imitation of American rock'n'roll, rhythm & blues and skiffle bands. \n\nThe 'Mersey' of 'Merseybeat' refers to the River Mersey . Liverpool lies on the eastern side of the river's estuary.\n\nThe name Mersey Beat was used for a Liverpool music magazine founded in 1961 by Bill Harry . Harry claims to have coined the term \"based on a policeman's beat and not that of the music\". The band the Pacifics were renamed the Mersey Beats in February 1962 by Bob Wooler , MC at the Cavern Club , and in April that year they became the Merseybeats . With the rise of the Beatles in 1963, the terms Mersey sound and Merseybeat were applied to bands and singers from Liverpool, the first time in British pop music that a sound and a location were linked together. The equivalent scenes in Birmingham and London were described as Brum Beat and the Tottenham Sound respectively. \n\nThe most distinctive characteristic of beat music was its strong beat, using the backbeat common to rock and roll and rhythm and blues , but often with a driving emphasis on all the beats of 4/4 bar. The rhythm itself—described by Alan Clayson as \"a changeless four-four offbeat on the snare drum\"—was developed in the clubs in Hamburg , West Germany, where many English groups, including the Beatles, performed in the early 1960s and where it was known as the mach schau (make show) beat. The 8/8 rhythm was flexible enough to be adopted for songs from a range of genres. In addition, according to music writer Dave Laing , \n\n\"[T]he chord playing of the rhythm guitar was broken up into a series of separate strokes, often one to the bar, with the regular plodding of the bass guitar and crisp drumming behind it. This gave a very different effect from the monolithic character of rock, in that the beat was given not by the duplication of one instrument in the rhythm section by another, but by an interplay between all three. This flexibility also meant that beat music could cope with a greater range of time-signatures and song shapes than rock & roll had been able to\".\n\nBeat groups usually had simple guitar -dominated line-ups, with vocal harmonies and catchy tunes. The most common instrumentation of beat groups featured lead, rhythm and bass guitars plus drums, as popularised by the Beatles , the Searchers , and others. Beat groups—even those with a separate lead singer—often sang both verses and choruses in close harmony , resembling doo wop , with nonsense syllables in the backing vocals. \n\nIn the late 1950s, a flourishing culture of groups began to emerge, often out of the declining skiffle scene, in major urban centres in the UK like Liverpool, Manchester, Birmingham and London. This was particularly true in Liverpool, where it has been estimated that there were around 350 different bands active, often playing ballrooms, concert halls and clubs. Liverpool was perhaps uniquely placed within Britain to be the point of origin of a new form of music. Commentators have pointed to a combination of local solidarity, industrial decline , social deprivation, and the existence of a large population of Irish origin, the influence of which has been detected in Beat music. It was also a major port with links to America, particularly through the Cunard Yanks , which made for much greater access to American records and instruments like guitars, which could not easily be imported due to trade restrictions. As a result, Beat bands were heavily influenced by American groups of the era, such as Buddy Holly and the Crickets (from which group the Beatles derived their name, combining it with a pun on the beat in their music), and to a lesser extent by British rock and roll groups such as the Shadows . \n\nAfter the national success of the Beatles in Britain from 1962, a number of Liverpool performers were able to follow them into the charts, including Gerry & The Pacemakers (who achieved a number one hit in the UK before the Beatles), the Searchers , and Cilla Black .\n\nOutside of Liverpool many local scenes were less influenced by rock and roll and more by the rhythm and blues and later directly by the blues . These included bands from Birmingham who were often grouped with the beat movement, the most successful being the Spencer Davis Group and the Moody Blues . Similar blues influenced bands who broke out from local scenes to national prominence were the Animals from Newcastle and Them from Belfast . From London, the term Tottenham Sound was largely based around the Dave Clark Five , but other London-based British rhythm and blues and rock bands who benefited from the beat boom of this era included the Rolling Stones , the Kinks and the Yardbirds . \n\nThe Beatles' appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show soon after led to chart success. During the next two years, the Animals , Petula Clark , the Dave Clark Five , the Rolling Stones , Donovan , Peter and Gordon , Manfred Mann , Freddie and the Dreamers , The Zombies , Wayne Fontana and the Mindbenders , Herman's Hermits , and the Troggs would have one or more number one singles in America. \n\nFreakbeat is a subgenre of rock and roll music developed mainly by harder-driving British groups, often those with a mod following during the Swinging London period of the mid to late 1960s. Freakbeat bridges \"British Invasion mod/ R&B /pop and psychedelia \". The term was coined by English music journalist Phil Smee . AllMusic writes that \"freakbeat\" is loosely defined, but generally describes the more obscure but hard-edged artists of the British Invasion era such as the Creation , the Pretty Things or Denny Laine 's early solo work. Other bands often mentioned as Freakbeat are the Action , the Move , the Smoke , the Sorrows , and Wimple Winch . \n\nBy 1967, beat music was beginning to sound out of date, particularly compared with the \"harder edged\" blues rock that was beginning to emerge.\n\nMost of the groups that had not already disbanded by 1967, like the Beatles, moved into different forms of rock music and pop music , including psychedelic rock and eventually progressive rock . \n\nBeat was a major influence on the American garage rock and folk rock movements, and would be a source of inspiration for subsequent rock music subgenres, including Britpop in the 1990s. ",
  "Forage fish , also called prey fish or bait fish , are small pelagic fish that feed on planktons (i.e. planktivores ) and other small aquatic organisms (e.g. krill ). They are in turn preyed upon by various predators including larger fish, seabirds and marine mammals , this making them keystone species in their aquatic ecosystems .\n\nThe typical ocean forage fish feed at the lower trophic level of the food chain , often by filter feeding . They include particularly fishes of the order Clupeiformes ( herrings , sardines , shad , hilsa , menhaden , anchovies , and sprats ), but also other small fish, including halfbeaks , silversides , smelt such as capelin and goldband fusiliers .\n\nForage fish compensate for their small size by forming schools . Some swim in synchronised grids with their mouths open so they can efficiently filter plankton. These schools can become immense shoals which move along coastlines and migrate across open oceans. The shoals are concentrated energy resources for the great marine predators. The predators are keenly focused on the shoals, acutely aware of their numbers and whereabouts, and make migrations themselves that can span thousands of miles to connect, or stay connected, with them. \n\nThe ocean's primary producers , mainly contained in phytoplanktons , produce food energy and biomass photosynthetically from sunlight and are the raw fuel for the ocean food webs . Forage fish transfer this energy by eating the plankton and becoming food themselves for the top predators. In this way, forage fish occupy the lower-central positions in ocean and lake food webs. \n\nThe fishing industry sometimes catch forage fish for commercial purposes (i.e. as seafood ), but primarily for use as feeder fish to raise more valuable piscivorous animals (e.g. salmon farms ). Some fisheries scientists are expressing concern that this will affect the populations of predator fish that depend on them. The practice of harvesting forage fish can also be a sign of overfishing as fish stocks of larger species in the fisheries are depleted thus forcing the industry to start fishing down the food web .\n\nTypical ocean forage fish are small, silvery schooling oily fish such as herring , anchovies and menhaden , and other small, schooling baitfish like capelin , smelts , sand lance , halfbeaks , pollock , butterfish and juvenile rockfish . Herrings are a preeminent forage fish, often marketed as sardines or pilchards .\n\nThe term \"forage fish\" is a term used in fisheries , and is applied also to forage species that are not true fish but play a significant role as prey for predators. Thus invertebrates such as squid and shrimp are also referred to as \"forage fish\". Even the tiny shrimp-like creatures called krill , small enough to be eaten by other forage fish, yet large enough to eat the same zooplankton as forage fish, are often classified as \"forage fish\". \n\nForage fish utilise the biomass of copepods , mysids and krill in the pelagic zone to become the dominant converters of the enormous ocean production of zooplankton. They are, in turn, central prey items for higher trophic levels . Forage fish may have achieved their dominance because of the way they live in huge, and often extremely fast cruising schools.\n\nThough forage fish are abundant, there are relatively few species. There are more species of primary producers and apex predators in the ocean than there are forage fish. \n\nForage fish occupy central positions in the ocean food webs . The position that a fish occupies in a food web is called its trophic level ( Greek trophē = food). The organisms it eats are at a lower trophic level, and the organisms that eat it are at a higher trophic level. Forage fish occupy middle levels in the food web, serving as a dominant prey to higher level fish, seabirds and mammals.\n\nEcological pyramids are graphical representations, along the lines of the diagram at the right, which show how biomass or productivity changes at each trophic level in an ecosystem . The first or bottom level is occupied by primary producers or autotrophs ( Greek autos = self and trophe = food). These are the names given to organisms that do not feed on other organisms, but produce biomass from inorganic compounds, mostly by a process of photosynthesis .\n\nIn oceans, most primary production is performed by algae . This is a contrast to land, where most primary production is performed by vascular plants . Algae ranges from single floating cells to attached seaweeds , while vascular plants are represented in the ocean by groups such as the seagrasses . Larger producers, such as seagrasses and seaweeds, are mostly confined to the littoral zone and shallow waters, where they attach to the underlying substrate and are still within the photic zone . Most primary production in the ocean is performed by microscopic organisms , the phytoplankton.\n\nThus, in ocean environments, the first bottom trophic level is occupied principally by phytoplankton , microscopic drifting organisms, mostly one-celled algae , that float in the sea. Most phytoplankton are too small to be seen individually with the unaided eye . They can appear as a green discoloration of the water when they are present in high enough numbers. Since they increase their biomass mostly through photosynthesis they live in the sun-lit surface layer ( euphotic zone ) of the sea.\n\nThe most important groups of phytoplankton include the diatoms and dinoflagellates . Diatoms are especially important in oceans, where they are estimated to contribute up to 45% of the total ocean's primary production. Diatoms are usually microscopic , although some species can reach up to 2 millimetres (0.079 in) in length.\n\nThe second trophic level ( primary consumers ) is occupied by zooplankton which feed off the phytoplankton . Together with the phytoplankton, they form the base of the food pyramid that supports most of the world's great fishing grounds. Zooplankton are tiny animals found with the phytoplankton in oceanic surface waters , and include tiny crustaceans , and fish larvae and fry (recently hatched fish). Most zooplankton are filter feeders , and they use appendages to strain the phytoplankton in the water. Some larger zooplankton also feed on smaller zooplankton. Some zooplankton can jump about a bit to avoid predators, but they cannot really swim. Like phytoplankton, they float with the currents, tides and winds instead. Zooplanktons can reproduce rapidly, their populations can increase up to thirty percent a day under favourable conditions. Many live short and productive lives and reach maturity quickly.\n\nParticularly important groups of zooplankton are the copepods and krill . These are not shown in the images above, but are discussed in more detail later. Copepods are a group of small crustaceans found in ocean and freshwater habitats . They are the biggest source of protein in the sea, and are important prey for forage fish. Krill constitute the next biggest source of protein. Krill are particularly large predator zooplankton which feed on smaller zooplankton. This means they really belong to the third trophic level, secondary consumers, along with the forage fish.\n\nTogether, phytoplankton and zooplankton make up most of the plankton in the sea. Plankton is the term applied to any small drifting organisms that float in the sea ( Greek planktos = wanderer or drifter). By definition, organisms classified as plankton are unable to swim against ocean currents; they cannot resist the ambient current and control their position. In ocean environments, the first two trophic levels are occupied mainly by plankton . Plankton are divided into producers and consumers. The producers are the phytoplankton (Greek phyton = plant) and the consumers, who eat the phytoplankton, are the zooplankton (Greek zoon = animal).\n\nForage fish feed on plankton . When they are eaten by larger predators, they transfer this energy from the bottom of the food chain to the top and in this way are the central link between trophic levels . \n\nForage fish are usually filter feeders , meaning that they feed by straining suspended matter and food particles from water. They usually travel in large, slow moving, tightly packed schools with their mouths open. They are typically omnivorous . Their diet is usually based primarily on zooplankton, although, since they are omnivorous, they also take in some phytoplankton.\n\nYoung forage fish, such as herring, mostly feed on phytoplankton and as they mature they start to consume larger organisms. Older herrings feed on zooplankton , tiny animals that are found in oceanic surface waters , and fish larvae and fry (recently hatched fish). Copepods and other tiny crustaceans are common zooplankton eaten by forage fish. During daylight , many forage fish stay in the safety of deep water, feeding at the surface only at night when there is less chance of predation. They swim with their mouths open, filtering plankton from the water as it passes through their gills.\n\nOcean halfbeaks are omnivores which feed on algae , plankton, marine plants like seagrass , invertebrates like pteropods and crustaceans and smaller fishes. Some tropical species feed on animals during the day and plants at night, while others alternate summer carnivory with winter herbivory. They are in turn eaten by billfish , mackerel , and sharks . \n\nForage fish are the food that sustains larger predators above them in the ocean food chain. The superabundance they present in their schools make them ideal food sources for top predator fish such as tuna , striped bass , cod , salmon , barracuda and swordfish , as well as sharks , whales , dolphins , porpoises , seals , sea lions , and seabirds . \n\nForage fish compensate for their small size by forming schools . These sometimes immense gatherings fuel the ocean food web. Most forage fish are pelagic fish , which means they form their schools in open water, and not on the bottom ( benthic fish ) or near the bottom ( benthopelagic fish ). They are short-lived, and go mostly unnoticed by humans, apart from an occasional support role in a documentary about a great ocean predator. While we may not pay them much attention, the great marine predators are keenly focused on them, acutely aware of their numbers and whereabouts, and make migrations that can span thousands of miles to connect with them. After all, forage fish are their food. \n\nHerring are among the most spectacular schooling fish. They aggregate together in huge numbers. Schools have been measured at over four cubic kilometres in size, containing about four billion fish. These schools move along coastlines and traverse the open oceans. Herring schools in general have very precise arrangements which allow the school to maintain relatively constant cruising speeds. Herrings have excellent hearing, and their schools react very fast to a predator. The herrings keep a certain distance from a moving scuba diver or cruising predator like a killer whale, forming a vacuole which can look like a doughnut from a spotter plane. The intricacies of schooling is far from fully understood, especially the swimming and feeding energetics. Many hypotheses to explain the function of schooling have been suggested, such as better orientation, synchronized hunting, predator confusion and reduced risk of being found. Schooling also has disadvantages, such as excretion buildup in the breathing media and oxygen and food depletion. The way the fish array in the school probably gives energy saving advantages, though this is controversial. \n\nOn calm days, schools of herring can be detected at the surface a mile away by little waves they form, or from several meters at night when they trigger bioluminescence in surrounding plankton . Underwater recordings show herring constantly cruising at high speeds up to 108 cm per second, with much higher escape speeds.\n\nThey are fragile fish, and because of their adaptation to schooling behaviour they are rarely displayed in aquaria . Even with the best facilities aquaria can offer they become sluggish compared to their quivering energy in wild schools.\n\nCopepods are a group of small crustaceans found in ocean and freshwater habitats . Many species are planktonic (drifting in the ocean water), while others are benthic (living on the sea floor). Copepods are typically one millimetre (0.04 in) to two millimetres (0.08 in) long, with a teardrop shaped body. Like other crustaceans they have an armoured exoskeleton , but they are so small that this armour, and the entire body, is usually transparent.\n\nCopepods are usually the dominant zooplankton . Some scientists say they form the largest animal biomass on the planet. The other contender is the Antarctic krill . But copepods are smaller than krill, with faster growth rates, and they are more evenly distributed throughout the oceans. This means copepods almost certainly contribute more secondary production to the world's oceans than krill, and perhaps more than all other groups of marine organisms together. They are a major item on the forage fish menu.\n\nCopepods are very alert and evasive. They have large antennae . When they spread their antennae they can sense the pressure wave from an approaching fish and jump with great speed over a few centimeters.\n\nHerrings are pelagic feeders. Their prey consists of a wide spectrum of phytoplankton and zooplankton , amongst which copepods are the dominant prey. Young herring usually capture small copepods by hunting them individually— they approach them from below. The (half speed) video loop at the left shows a juvenile herring feeding on copepods . In the middle of the image a copepod escapes successfully to the left. The opercula (hard bony flaps covering the gills ) are spread wide open to compensate the pressure wave which would alert the copepod to trigger a jump. \n\nIf prey concentrations reach very high levels, the herrings adopt a method called \"ram feeding\". They swim with their mouth wide open and their opercula fully expanded. Every several feet, they close and clean their gill rakers for a few milliseconds ( filter feeding ). In the photo on the right, herring ram feed on a school of copepods . The fish all open their mouths and opercula wide at the same time (the red gills are visible—click to enlarge). The fish swim in a grid where the distance between them is the same as the jump length of their prey, as indicated in the animation below.\n\nIn the animation, juvenile herring hunt the copepods in synchronization: The copepods sense with their antennae the pressure-wave of an approaching herring and react with a fast escape jump. The length of the jump is fairly constant. The fish align themselves in a grid with this characteristic jump length. A copepod can dart about 80 times before it tires out. After a jump, it takes it 60 milliseconds to spread its antennae again, and this time delay becomes its undoing, as the almost endless stream of herrings allows a herring to eventually snap the copepod. A single juvenile herring could never catch a large copepod. \n\nForage fish often make great migrations between their spawning, feeding and nursery grounds. Schools of a particular stock usually travel in a triangle between these grounds. For example, one stock of herrings have their spawning ground in southern Norway , their feeding ground in Iceland , and their nursery ground in northern Norway. Wide triangular journeys such as these may be important because forage fish, when feeding, cannot distinguish their own offspring.\n\nFertile feeding grounds for forage fish are provided by ocean upwellings. Oceanic gyres are large-scale ocean currents caused by the Coriolis effect . Wind-driven surface currents interact with these gyres and the underwater topography, such as seamounts and the edge of continental shelves , to produce downwellings and upwellings . These can transport nutrients which plankton thrive on. The result can be rich feeding grounds attractive to the plankton feeding forage fish. In turn, the forage fish themselves become a feeding ground for larger predator fish. Most upwellings are coastal, and many of them support some of the most productive fisheries in the world. Regions of notable upwelling include coastal Peru , Chile , Arabian Sea , western South Africa , eastern New Zealand and the California coast.\n\nCapelin are a forage fish of the smelt family found in the Atlantic and Arctic oceans. In summer, they graze on dense swarms of plankton at the edge of the ice shelf. Larger capelin also eat krill and other crustaceans . The capelin move inshore in large schools to spawn and migrate in spring and summer to feed in plankton rich areas between Iceland , Greenland , and Jan Mayen . The migration is affected by ocean currents . Around Iceland maturing capelin make large northward feeding migrations in spring and summer. The return migration takes place in September to November. The spawning migration starts north of Iceland in December or January.\n\nThe diagram on the right shows the main spawning grounds and larval drift routes. Capelin on the way to feeding grounds is coloured green, capelin on the way back is blue, and the breeding grounds are red. In a paper published in 2009, researchers from Iceland recount their application of an interacting particle model to the capelin stock around Iceland, successfully predicting the spawning migration route for 2008. \n\nSchooling forage fish are subject to constant attacks by predators. An example is the attacks that take place during the African sardine run . The African sardine run is a spectacular migration by millions of silvery sardines along the southern coastline of Africa. In terms of biomass, the sardine run could rival East Africa's great wildebeest migration . \n\nSardines have a short life-cycle, living only two or three years. Adult sardines, about two years old, mass on the Agulhas Bank where they spawn during spring and summer, releasing tens of thousands of eggs into the water. The adult sardines then make their way in hundreds of shoals towards the sub-tropical waters of the Indian Ocean . A larger shoal might be 7 kilometers (4.3 miles) long, 1.5 kilometers (0.93 miles) wide and 30 meters (98 feet) deep. Huge numbers of sharks, dolphins, tuna, sailfish, Cape fur seals and even killer whales congregate and follow the shoals, creating a feeding frenzy along the coastline. \n\nWhen threatened, sardines instinctively group together and create massive bait balls . Bait balls can be up to 20 meters (66 feet) in diameter. They are short lived, seldom lasting longer than 20 minutes. As many as 18,000 dolphins, behaving like sheepdogs, round the sardines into these bait balls, or herd them to shallow water (corralling) where they are easier to catch. Once rounded up, the dolphins and other predators take turns plowing through the bait balls, gorging on the fish as they sweep through. Seabirds also attack them from above, flocks of gannets , cormorants , terns and gulls . Some of these seabirds plummet from heights of 30 metres (98 feet), plunging through the water leaving vapour-like trails behind like fighter planes. \n\nThe eggs, left behind at the Agulhas Banks, drift northwest with the current into waters off the west coast, where the larvae develop into juvenile fish. When they are old enough, they aggregate into dense shoals and migrate southwards, returning to the Agulhas banks in order to restart the cycle. \n\nHerring has been known as a staple food source since 3000 B.C. In Roman times, anchovies were the base for the fermented fish sauce called garum . This staple of cuisine was produced in industrial quantities and transported over long distances.\n\nFishing for sardela or sardina ( Sardina pilchardus ) is an ongoing activity on the Croatian Adriatic coasts of Dalmatia and Istria . It traces its roots back thousands of years. The region was then largely a Venetian dominion, part of the Roman Empire . The area has always been sustained through fishing mainly sardines. Along the coast towns still promote the traditional practice of fishing by lateen sail boats for tourism and festivals.\n\nPilchard fishing and processing thrived in Cornwall between 1750 and 1880, after which stocks went into an almost terminal decline. Recently (2007) stocks have been improving. The industry has featured in many works of art, including Stanhope Forbes and other Newlyn School artists.\n\nTraditional commercial fisheries were directed towards high value ocean predators such as cod , rockfish and tuna , rather than forage fish. As technologies developed, fisheries became so effective at locating and catching predator fish that many of the stocks collapsed. The industry compensated by turning to species lower in the food chain. \n\nIn former times, forage fish were more difficult to fish profitably, and were a small part of the global marine fisheries. But modern industrial fishing technologies have enabled the removal of increasing quantities. Industrial-scale forage fish fisheries need large scale landings of fish to return profits. They are dominated by a small number of corporate fishing and processing companies. \n\nForage fish populations are very vulnerable when faced with modern fishing equipment. They swim near the surface in compacted schools, so they are relatively easy to locate at the surface with sophisticated electronic fishfinders and from above with spotter planes . Once located, they are scooped out of the water using highly efficient nets, such as purse seines , which remove most of the school.\n\nSpawning patterns in forage fish are highly predictable. Some fisheries use knowledge of these patterns to harvest the forage species as they come together to spawn, removing the fish before they have actually spawned. Fishing during spawning periods or at other times when forage fish amass in large numbers can also be a blow to predators. Many predators, such as whales, tuna and sharks, have evolved to migrate long distances to specific sites for feeding and breeding. Their survival hinges on their finding these forage schools at their feeding grounds. The great ocean predators find that, no matter how they are adapted for speed, size, endurance or stealth, they are on the losing side when faced with the machinery of contemporary industrial fishing. \n\nAltogether, forage fish account for 37 percent (31.5 million tonnes) of all fish taken from the world's oceans each year. However, because there are fewer species of forage fish compared to predator fish, forage species fisheries are the largest in the world. Seven of the top ten fisheries target forage fish. The total world catch of herrings, sardines and anchovies alone in 2005 was 22.4 million tonnes, 24 percent of the total world catch. \n\nThe Peruvian anchoveta fishery is now the biggest in the world (10.7 million tonnes in 2004), while the Alaskan pollock fishery in the Bering Sea is the largest single species fishery in the world (3 million tonnes). The Alaskan pollock is said to be the largest remaining single species source of palatable fish in the world. However, the biomass of pollock has declined in recent years, perhaps spelling trouble for both the Bering Sea ecosystem and the commercial fishery it supports. Acoustic surveys by NOAA indicate that the 2008 pollock population is almost 50 percent lower than last year's survey levels. [ citation needed ] Some scientists think this decline in Alaska pollock could repeat the collapse experienced by Atlantic cod , which could have negative consequences for the entire Bering Sea ecosystem. Salmon, halibut, endangered Steller sea lions, fur seals, and humpback whales eat pollock and depend on healthy populations to sustain themselves. \n\nEighty percent of the forage fish caught are fed to animals, in large part due to the high content of beneficial long chain omega-3 fatty acids in their flesh. Ninety percent is processed into fishmeal and fish oil . Of this, 46 percent was fed to farmed fish , 24 percent to pigs, and 22 percent to poultry (2002). Six times the weight of forage fish is fed to pigs and poultry alone than the entire seafood consumption of the U.S. market. One of the most promising alternatives to fish oil as a source of long chain omega-3 fatty acids and certain amino acids is algal oil from microalgae , the original source of these fatty acids in forage fish. \n\nAccording to Turchini and De Silva (2008), another 2.5 million tonnes of the annual forage fish catch is consumed by the global cat food industry. In Australia, pet cats eat 13.7 kilograms of fish a year compared to the 11 kilograms eaten by the average Australian. The pet food industry is increasingly marketing premium and super-premium products, when different raw materials, such as the by-products of the fish filleting industry, could be used instead. \n\nIn 2008 the Sea Around Us Project completed a nine-year study of forage fish led by the fisheries scientists Jacqueline Alder and Daniel Pauly . They concluded that... \n\nIn 2015 sardine populations crashed along the west coast of the United States, causing the fishery to close early and remain closed through the 2015–2016 season. A key reason for the population crash, was overfishing due to the demand of fish meals and fish oil used in feed for aquaculture and for human nutritional supplements. In an effort to provide some relief from the pressure put on forage fish populations, the World Bank along with the University of Arizona, Monterey Bay Aquarium and the New England Aquarium has sponsored a competition called the F3 (Fish-Free Feed) Challenge, which will award $200,000 to the most successful fish feed manufacturer who develops aquaculture feeds not made from fish. \n\nForage fish also inhabit freshwater habitats, such as lakes and rivers, where they serve as food for larger freshwater predators. Usually smaller than 15 centimetres (6 in) in length, these small bait fish make up most of the fish found in lakes and rivers. The minnow family alone, consisting of minnows , chubs , shiners and daces , consists of more than fifty species. Other freshwater forage fish include suckers , killifish , shad , bony fish as well as fish of the sunfish family , excluding black basses and crappie , and smaller species of the carp family. There are also anadromous forage fish, such as eulachon .\n\nIn the context of human activity, within any fresh or saltwater ecosystem, there will always be both desirable and undesirable fishes, and this varies from country to country, and often from region to region within a country. Sport fishermen divide freshwater predators of forage fish into those:\n\nRough or coarse fish usually refers to fish that are not commonly eaten, not sought after for sporting reasons, or have become invasive species reducing the populations of desirable fish. They compete for forage fish with the more popular sport fish. They are often regarded as a nuisance, and are not usually protected by game laws. Forage fish generally are not considered rough or coarse fish because of their usefulness as bait.\n\nThe term rough fish is used by U.S. state agencies and anglers to describe undesirable predator fish. In North America, anglers fish for salmon , trout , bass , pike , catfish , walleye and muskellunge . The smallest fish are called panfish , because they can fit in a standard cooking pan. Some examples are crappies , rock bass , perch , bluegill and sunfish .\n\nThe term coarse fish originated in the United Kingdom in the early 19th century. Prior to that time, recreational fishing was the sport of the gentry , who angled for trout and salmon which they called \"game fish\". Fish other than game fish were disdained as \"coarse fish\". These days, \"game fish\" refers to Salmonids (other than grayling ) — that is, salmon , trout and char . Coarse fish are made up mostly of the larger species of Cyprinids ( carp , roach , bream ) as well as pike , catfish , gar and lamprey . Coarse fish are no longer disdained; indeed, fishing for coarse fish has become a popular pastime.\n\nForage fish are sometimes referred to as bait fish or feeder fish . Bait fish is a term used particularly by recreational fishermen, although commercial fisherman also catch fish to bait longlines and traps . Forage fish is a fisheries term, and is used in the context of fisheries. Bait fish, by contrast, are fish that are caught by humans to use as bait for other fish. The terms overlap in the sense that most bait fish are also forage fish, and vice versa. Feeder fish is a term used particularly in the context of fish aquariums . It refers essentially to the same concept as forage fish, small fish that are eaten by larger fish, but the term is adapted to the particular requirements of working with fish in aquariums.",
  "Plucked\n\nThe trombone ( German : Posaune , Italian, French: trombone ) is a musical instrument in the brass family . As with all brass instruments, sound is produced when the player's lips vibrate inside a mouthpiece, causing the air column inside the instrument to vibrate . Nearly all trombones use a telescoping slide mechanism to alter the pitch instead of the valves used by other brass instruments. The valve trombone is an exception, using three valves similar to those on a trumpet , and the superbone has valves and a slide.\n\nThe word \"trombone\" derives from Italian tromba (trumpet) and -one (a suffix meaning \"large\"), so the name means \"large trumpet\". The trombone has a predominantly cylindrical bore like the trumpet , in contrast to the more conical brass instruments like the cornet , the flugelhorn , the baritone , and the euphonium . The most frequently encountered trombones are the tenor trombone and bass trombone . These are treated as non-transposing instruments , reading at concert pitch in bass clef, with higher notes sometimes being notated in tenor clef. They are pitched in B ♭ , an octave below the B ♭ trumpet and an octave above the B ♭ bass tuba . The once common E ♭ alto trombone became less common as improvements in technique extended the upper range of the tenor, but it is regaining popularity for its lighter sonority. In British brass-band music the tenor trombone is treated as a B ♭ transposing instrument , written in treble clef, and the alto trombone is written at concert pitch, usually in alto clef.\n\nA person who plays the trombone is called a trombonist or trombone player.\n\n\"Trombone\" comes from the Italian word tromba (trumpet) plus the suffix -one (large), meaning \"large trumpet\".\n\nDuring the Renaissance, the equivalent English term was \" sackbut \". The word first appears in court records in 1495 as \" shakbusshe \". \" Shakbusshe \" is similar to \" sacabuche \", attested in Spain as early as 1478. The French equivalent \" saqueboute \" appears in 1466. \n\nThe German \" Posaune \" long predates the invention of the slide and could refer to a natural trumpet as late as the early fifteenth century. \n\nThe sackbut appeared in the 15th century and was used extensively across Europe, declining in most places by the mid to late 17th century. It was used in outdoor events, in concert, and in liturgical settings. Its principal role was as the contratenor part in a dance band. It was also used, along with shawms , in bands sponsored by towns and courts. Trumpeters and trombonists were employed in German city-states to stand watch in the city towers and herald the arrival of important people to the city, an activity that signified wealth and strength in 16th-century German cities. These heralding trombonists were often viewed separately from the more skilled trombonists who played in groups such as the alta capella wind ensembles and the first orchestral ensembles, which performed in religious settings such as St Mark's Basilica in Venice in the early 17th century. The 17th-century trombone had slightly smaller dimensions than a modern trombone, with a bell that was more conical and less flared. Modern period performers use the term \"sackbut\" to distinguish this earlier version of the trombone from the modern instrument.\n\nComposers who wrote for trombone during this period include Claudio Monteverdi , Heinrich Schütz , Giovanni Gabrieli and his uncle Andrea Gabrieli . The trombone doubled voice parts in sacred works, but there are also solo pieces written for trombone in the early 17th century.\n\nWhen the sackbut returned to common use in England in the 18th century, Italian music was so influential that the instrument became known by its Italian name, \"trombone\". Its name remained constant in Italy ( trombone ) and in Germany ( Posaune ).\n\nDuring the later Baroque period, Johann Sebastian Bach and George Frideric Handel used trombones on a few occasions. Bach called for a tromba di tirarsi , which may have been a form of the closely related slide trumpet , to double the cantus firmus in some liturgical cantatas . He also employed a choir of four trombones to double the chorus in three of his cantatas ( BWV 2 , BWV 21 and BWV 38 ), and used three trombones and a cornett in the cantata BWV 25 . Handel used it in Samson , in Israel in Egypt , and in the Death March from Saul . All were examples of an oratorio style popular during the early 18th century. Score notations are rare because only a few professional \"Stadtpfeiffer\" or alta cappella musicians were available. Handel, for instance, had to import trombones to England from a Royal court in Hanover, Germany, to perform one of his larger compositions. [ citation needed ] Because of the relative scarcity of trombones, their solo parts were generally interchangeable with other instruments.\n\nThe construction of the trombone did not change very much between the Baroque and Classical period, but the bell became slightly more flared. Christoph Willibald Gluck was the first major composer to use the trombone in an opera overture, in the opera Alceste (1767). He also used it in the operas Orfeo ed Euridice , Iphigénie en Tauride (1779), and Echo et Narcisse .\n\nEarly Classical composers occasionally included concertante movements with alto trombone as a solo instrument in divertimenti and serenades ; these movements are often extracted from the multi-movement works and performed as standalone alto trombone concerti. Examples include the Serenade in E ♭ (1755) by Leopold Mozart and Divertimento in D major (1764) by Michael Haydn . The earliest known independent trombone concerto is probably the Concerto for Alto Trombone and Strings in B ♭ (1769) by Johann Georg Albrechtsberger .\n\nMozart used the trombone in operas (notably in scenes featuring the Commendatore in Don Giovanni ) and in sacred music. The prominent solo part in the Tuba Mirum section of his Requiem became a staple audition piece for the instrument. Aside from solo parts, Mozart's orchestration usually features a trio of alto, tenor and bass trombones, doubling the respective voices in the choir. The earliest known symphony featuring a trombone section is Symphony in C minor by Anton Zimmermann . The date is uncertain but it is most probably from the peak of the composer's activity in the 1770s. The earliest confident date for introducing the trombone to the symphony is therefore Zimmermann's death in 1781.\n\nSymphony in E ♭ (1807) by Swedish composer Joachim Nicolas Eggert features an independent trombone part. Ludwig van Beethoven is sometimes mistakenly credited with the trombone's introduction into the orchestra, having used it shortly afterwards in his Symphony No. 5 in C minor (1808), Symphony No. 6 in F major (\"Pastoral\") , and Symphony No. 9 (\"Choral\") .\n\nTrombones were included in operas, symphonies, and other compositions by Felix Mendelssohn , Hector Berlioz , Franz Berwald , Charles Gounod , Franz Liszt , Gioacchino Rossini , Franz Schubert , Robert Schumann , Giuseppe Verdi , and Richard Wagner , and others.\n\nThe trombone trio was combined with one or two cornetts during the Renaissance and early Baroque periods. The replacement of cornetts with oboes and clarinets did not change the trombone's role as a support to the alto, tenor, and bass voices of the chorus (usually in ecclesiastical settings), whose moving harmonic lines were more difficult to pick out than the melodic soprano line. The introduction of trombones into the orchestra allied them more closely with trumpets, and soon a tenor trombone replaced the alto. The Germans and Austrians kept alto trombone somewhat longer than the French, who preferred a section of three tenor trombones until after the Second World War . In other countries, the trio of two tenor trombones and one bass became standard by about the mid-19th century.\n\nTrombonists were employed less by court orchestras and cathedrals, who had been providing the instruments. Military musicians were provided with instruments, and instruments like the long F or E ♭ bass trombone remained in military use until around the First World War . Orchestral musicians adopted the tenor trombone, as it could generally play any of the three trombone parts in orchestral scores. [ vague ]\n\nValve trombones in the mid-19th century did little to alter the make-up of the orchestral trombone section. While its use declined in German and French orchestras, the valve trombone remained popular in some countries, including Italy and Bohemia , almost to the exclusion of the slide instrument. Composers such as Giuseppe Verdi, Giacomo Puccini , Bedřich Smetana , and Antonín Dvořák scored for a valve trombone section.\n\nAs the ophicleide or the tuba was added to the orchestra during the 19th century, bass trombone parts were scored in a higher register than previously. [ vague ] The bass trombone regained some independence in the early 20th century. Experiments with the trombone section included Richard Wagner's addition of a contrabass trombone in Der Ring des Nibelungen and Gustav Mahler's and Richard Strauss' addition of a second bass trombone to the usual trio of two tenors and one bass. The majority of orchestral works are still scored for the usual mid- to late-19th-century low brass section of two tenor trombones, one bass trombone, and one tuba.\n\nWind bands began during the French Revolution of 1791 and have always included trombones. They became more established in the 19th century and included circus bands, military bands, brass bands (primarily in the UK), and town bands (primarily in the US). Some of these, especially military bands in Europe, used rear-facing trombones with the bell pointing behind the player's left shoulder. These bands played a limited repertoire that consisted mainly of orchestral transcriptions, arrangements of popular and patriotic tunes, and feature pieces for soloists (usually cornetists, singers, and violinists). A notable work for wind band is Berlioz's 1840 Grande symphonie funèbre et triomphale , which uses a trombone solo for the entire second movement. Toward the end of the 19th century, trombone virtuosi began appearing as soloists in American wind bands. Arthur Pryor , who played with the John Philip Sousa band and formed his own band, was one of the most famous of these trombonists.\n\nIn the Romantic era, Leipzig became a center of trombone pedagogy, and the instrument was taught at the Musikhochschule founded by Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy . The Paris Conservatory and its yearly exhibition also contributed to trombone education. At the Leipzig academy, Mendelssohn's bass trombonist, Karl Traugott Queisser , was the first in a long line of distinguished professors of the trombone. Several composers wrote works for Queisser, including Mendelssohn's concertmaster Ferdinand David , Ernst Sachse, and Friedrich August Belcke . David wrote his Concertino for Trombone and Orchestra in 1837, and Sachse's solo works remain popular in Germany. Queisser championed and popularized Christian Friedrich Sattler 's tenor-bass trombone during the 1840s, leading to its widespread use in orchestras throughout Germany and Austria.\n\nSattler had a great influence on trombone design, introducing a significantly larger bore (the most important innovation since the Renaissance), Schlangenverzierungen (snake decorations), the bell garland, and the wide bell flare. These features were widely copied during the 19th century and are still found on German made trombones.\n\nThe trombone was improved in the 19th century with the addition of \"stockings\" at the end of the inner slide to reduce friction, the development of the water key to expel condensation from the horn, and the occasional addition of a valve that was designed to be set in a single position but later became the modern F-valve. The valve trombone appeared around the 1850s shortly after the invention of valves, and was in common use in Italy and Austria in the second half of the century.\n\nWith the rise of recorded music and music schools, orchestral trombone sections around the world began to have a more consistent idea of a standard trombone sound. In the 1940s, British orchestras abandoned the use of small bore tenors and G basses in favor of the American/German choice of large bore tenors and B ♭ basses. French orchestras did the same in the 1960s.\n\nDuring the first half of the 20th century the popularity of touring and community concert bands in the United States decreased. At the same time, the development of music education in the public school system made high-school and university concert bands and marching bands ubiquitous. A typical concert band trombone section consists of two tenor trombones and one bass trombone, but using multiple players per part is common practice, especially in public-school settings. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn the 1900s the trombone and the tuba played bass lines and outlined chords to support improvisation by the higher-pitched instruments. It began to be used as a solo instrument during the swing era of the mid-1920s. Jack Teagarden and J. J. Johnson were early trombone soloists. \n\nThe trombone's construction changed in the 20th century. Different materials were used, mouthpiece, bore, and bell dimensions increased, and different mutes and valves were developed. Despite the overall trend towards larger bore instruments, many European trombone makers prefer a slightly smaller bore than their American counterparts.\n\nOne of the most significant changes was the development of the F-attachment trigger. Through the mid-20th century there was no need for orchestral trombonists to use instruments with the F attachment trigger. As contemporary composers such as Mahler began to write lower passages for the trombone, the trigger became necessary.\n\nThe trombone can be found in symphony orchestras, concert bands, big bands , marching bands, military bands, brass bands, and brass choirs. In chamber music, it is used in brass quintets , quartets, and trios, and also in trombone groups ranging from trios to choirs. A trombone choir can vary in size from five to twenty or more members. Trombones are also common in swing, jazz, merengue, salsa, R&B, ska , and New Orleans brass bands.\n\nThe trombone is a predominantly cylindrical tube with two U-shaped bends and a flared bell at the end. The tubing is approximately cylindrical but contains a complex series of tapers which affect the instrument's intonation. As with other brass instruments , sound is produced by blowing air through pursed lips producing a vibration that creates a standing wave in the instrument.\n\nThe detachable cup-shaped mouthpiece is similar to that of the baritone horn and closely related to that of the trumpet . It has a venturi : a small constriction of the air column that adds resistance, greatly affecting the tone of the instrument. The slide section consists of a leadpipe , inner and outer slide tubes, and bracing, or \"stays\". The soldered stays on modern instruments replaced the loose stays found on sackbuts (medieval precursors to trombones). \n\nThe most distinctive feature of the trombone is the slide that lengthens the tubing and lowers the pitch (cf. valve trombone ). During the Renaissance , sleeves (called \"stockings\") were developed to decrease friction that would impede the slide's motion. These were soldered onto the ends of the inner slide tubes to slightly increase their diameter. The ends of inner slides on modern instruments are manufactured with a slightly larger diameter to achieve the same end. This part of the slide must be lubricated frequently. The slide section is connected to the bell section by the neckpipe and a U-bend called the bell or back bow. The joint connecting the slide and bell sections has a threaded collar to secure the connection. Prior to the early 20th century this connection was made with friction joints alone.\n\nTrombones have a short tuning slide in the U-shaped bend between the neckpipe and the bell, a feature designed by the French maker François Riedlocker in the early 19th century. It was incorporated into French and British designs, and later to German and American models, although German trombones were built without tuning slides well into the 20th century. Many types of trombone also include one or more rotary valves connected to additional tubing which lengthens the instrument. This extends the low range of the instrument and creates the option of using alternate slide positions for many notes.\n\nLike the trumpet, the trombone is considered a cylindrical bore instrument since it has extensive sections of tubing that are of unchanging diameter (the slide section must be cylindrical in order to function). Tenor trombones typically have a bore of 0.450 inches (11.4 mm) (small bore) to 0.547 inches (13.9 mm) (large or orchestral bore) after the leadpipe and through the slide. The bore expands through the bow to the bell, which is typically between 7 and 8 + 1 ⁄ 2 inches (18 and 22 cm). A number of common variations on trombone construction are noted below.\n\nTrombone bells (and sometimes slides) may be constructed of different brass mixtures. The most common material is yellow brass (70% copper, 30% zinc), but other materials include rose brass (85% copper, 15% zinc) and red brass (90% copper, 10% zinc). Some manufacturers offer interchangeable bells. Tenor trombone bells are usually between 7 and 9 in (18–23 cm) in diameter, with most being between 7 + 1 ⁄ 2 and 8 + 1 ⁄ 2 in (19–22 cm). The smallest sizes are found on jazz trombones and older narrow-bore instruments, while the larger sizes are common on orchestral models. Bass trombone bells can be 10 + 1 ⁄ 2 in (27 cm) or more, with most being between 9 + 1 ⁄ 2 and 10 in (24 and 25 cm). The bell may be made from two separate brass sheets or from one single piece of metal, hammered on a mandrel to shape it. The edge of the bell may be finished with or without a piece of bell wire to secure it, which also affects the tone quality; most bells are built with bell wire. Occasionally, trombone bells are made from solid sterling silver .\n\nModern trombones often have a valve attachment, an extra loop of tubing attached to the bell section and engaged by a valve operated by the left hand by means of a lever or trigger . The valve attachment aids in increasing the lower range of the instrument, while also allowing alternate slide positions for difficult music passages. A valve can also make trills easier.\n\nThe valve attachment was originally developed by German instrument maker Christian Friedrich Sattler in the late 1830s for the Tenorbaßposaune ( lit. ' tenor-bass trombone ' ), a B ♭ tenor trombone built with the wider bore and larger bell of a bass trombone that Sattler had earlier invented in 1821. Sattler's valve attachment added about 3 feet (0.9 m) of tubing to lower the fundamental pitch from B ♭ to F, controlled by a rotary valve, and is essentially unchanged in modern instruments.\n\nValve attachments are most commonly found on tenor and bass trombones, but they can appear on sizes from soprano to contrabass.\n\nThe most common type of valve seen for valve attachments is the rotary valve , appearing on most band instruments, as well as most student and intermediate model trombones. Many improvements of the rotary valve, as well as entirely new and radically different valve designs, have been invented since the mid 20th century to give the trombone a more open, free sound than the tight bends in conventional rotary valve designs would allow. Many of these new valve designs have been widely adopted by players, especially in symphony orchestras. The Thayer axial flow valve is offered on professional models from most trombone manufacturers, and the Hagmann valve particularly from European manufacturers.\n\nSome trombones have three piston or rotary valves instead of a slide; see valve trombone .\n\nF attachment tubing usually has a larger bore through the attachment than through the rest of the instrument. A typical slide bore for an orchestral tenor trombone is 0.547 in (13.9 mm) while the bore in the attachment is 0.562 in (14.3 mm). The attachment tubing also incorporates a tuning slide to tune the valve separately from the rest of the instrument, usually long enough to lower the pitch by a semitone when fully extended (from F to E on tenor and bass trombones, to reach the missing low B 1 ).\n\nValve attachment tubing is often coiled tightly to keep within the bell section ( closed wrap or traditional wrap ). A less coiled configuration, called open wrap , is found on some 19th and early 20th century instruments. In the early 1980s, American instrument manufacturers began producing open wrap instruments after Californian instrument technician Larry Minick introduced open wraps around the same time that the Thayer valve began to emerge among orchestral players. Open wrap F attachment tubing is shaped in a single loop free of tight bends, resulting in a freer response and more \"open\" sound through the valve. \n\nIn marching bands and other situations where the trombone may be more prone to damage, the confined traditional wrap is more common, since open wrap tubing protrudes behind the bell section.\n\nSome trombones are tuned using a mechanism in the slide section instead of a tuning slide in the bell section. Having the tuning slide in the bell section (the more typical setup) requires two sections of cylindrical tubing in an otherwise conical part of the instrument, which affects the tone quality. Placing the tuning mechanism in the cylindrical slide section allows the bell section to remain conical.\n\nCommon and popular bore sizes for trombone slides are 0.500, 0.508, 0.525 and 0.547 in (12.7, 12.9, 13.3 and 13.9 mm) for tenor trombones, and 0.562 in (14.3 mm) for bass trombones. The slide may also be built with a dual-bore configuration, in which the bore of the second leg of the slide is slightly larger than the bore of the first leg, producing a stepwise conical effect. The most common dual-bore combinations are 0.481–0.491 in (12.2–12.5 mm), 0.500–0.508 in (12.7–12.9 mm), 0.508–0.525 in (12.9–13.3 mm), 0.525–0.547 in (13.3–13.9 mm), 0.547–0.562 in (13.9–14.3 mm) for tenor trombones, and 0.562–0.578 in (14.3–14.7 mm) for bass trombones.\n\nThe mouthpiece is a separate part of the trombone and can be interchanged between similarly sized trombones from different manufacturers. Available mouthpieces for trombone (as with all brass instruments) vary in material composition, length, diameter, rim shape, cup depth, throat entrance, venturi aperture, venturi profile, outside design and other factors. Variations in mouthpiece construction affect the individual player's ability to make a lip seal and produce a reliable tone, the timbre of that tone, its volume , the instrument's intonation tendencies, the player's subjective level of comfort, and the instrument's playability in a given pitch range.\n\nMouthpiece selection is a highly personal decision. Thus, a symphonic trombonist might prefer a mouthpiece with a deeper cup and sharper inner rim shape in order to produce a rich symphonic tone quality, while a jazz trombonist might choose a shallower cup for brighter tone and easier production of higher notes. Further, for certain compositions, these choices between two such performers could easily be reversed. Some mouthpiece makers now offer mouthpieces that feature removable rims, cups, and shanks allowing players to further customize and adjust their mouthpieces to their preference.\n\nInstruments made mostly from plastic, including the pBone and the Tromba plastic trombone, emerged in the 2010s as a cheaper and more robust alternative to brass. Plastic instruments could come in almost any colour but the sound plastic instruments produce is different from that of brass. While originally seen as a gimmick, these plastic models have found increasing popularity of the last decade and are now viewed as practice tools that make for more convenient travel as well as a cheaper option for beginning players not wishing to invest so much money in a trombone right away. Manufacturers now produce large-bore models with triggers as well as smaller alto models.\n\nGerman trombones have been built in a wide variety of bore and bell sizes. The traditional German Konzertposaune can differ substantially from American designs in many aspects. The mouthpiece is typically rather small and is placed into a slide section with a very long leadpipe of at least 12 to 24 inches (30–60 cm). The whole instrument is typically made of gold brass. They are constructed using very thin metal (especially in the bell section), and many have a metal ring called a Kranz ( lit. ' wreath ' ) on the rim of the bell. Their sound is very even across dynamic levels but it can be difficult to play at louder volumes. While their bore sizes were considered large in the 19th century, German trombones have altered very little over the last 150 years and are now typically somewhat smaller than their American counterparts. Bell sizes remain very large in all sizes of German trombone and a bass trombone bell may exceed 10 inches (25 cm) in diameter.\n\nValve attachments in tenor and bass trombones were first seen in the mid 19th century, originally on the tenor B ♭ trombone. Before 1850, bass trombone parts were mostly played on a slightly longer F-bass trombone (a fourth lower). The first valve was simply a fourth-valve, or in German \"Quart-Ventil\", built onto a B ♭ tenor trombone, to allow playing in low F. This valve was first built without a return spring, and was only intended to set the instrument in B ♭ or F for extended passages. Since the mid-20th century, modern instruments use a trigger to engage the valve while playing.\n\nAs with other traditional German and Austrian brass instruments, rotary valves are used to the exclusion of almost all other types of valve, even in valve trombones. Other features often found on German trombones include long water keys as well as Schlangenverzierungen (snake decorations) on the slide and bell U-bows to help protect the tubing from damage.\n\nSince around 1925, when jazz music became popular, Germany has been selling \"American trombones\" as well. Most trombones made and/or played in Germany today, especially by amateurs, are built in the American fashion, as those are much more widely available, and thus far cheaper. However, some higher-end manufacturers such as Thein make modern iterations of the classic German Konzertposaune , as well as American-style trombones with German features like the Kranz and snake decorations.\n\nFrench trombones were built in the very smallest bore sizes up to the end of the Second World War and whilst other sizes were made there, the French usually preferred the tenor trombone to any other size. French music, therefore, usually employed a section of three tenor trombones up to the mid–20th century. Tenor trombones produced in France during the 19th and early 20th centuries featured bore sizes of around 0.450 in (11.4 mm), small bells of not more than 6 in (15 cm) in diameter, as well as a funnel-shaped mouthpiece slightly larger than that of the cornet or horn . French tenor trombones were built in both C and B ♭ , altos in D ♭ , sopranos in F, piccolos in B ♭ , basses in G and E ♭ , and contrabasses in B ♭ .\n\nThe most frequently encountered types of trombone today are the tenor and bass , though as with many other instrument families such as the clarinet , the trombone has been built in sizes from piccolo to contrabass . Although trombones are usually constructed with a slide to change the pitch, valve trombones instead use the set of three valves common on other brass instruments.\n\nThe contrabass trombone is the lowest trombone, first appearing in BB ♭ an octave below the tenor with a double slide. This design was commissioned by Wagner in the 1870s for his Der Ring des Nibelungen opera cycle. Since the late 20th century however, it has largely been supplanted by a less cumbersome single-slide bass-contrabass instrument pitched in 12' F. With two valve attachments to provide the same full range as its predecessor, this design is effectively a modern bass trombone built down a perfect fourth . Although the contrabass has only appeared occasionally in orchestral repertoire and is not a permanent member of the modern orchestra, it has enjoyed a revival in the 21st century, particularly in film and video game soundtracks.\n\nAlthough early instruments were pitched in G, F or E ♭ below the tenor trombone, the modern bass trombone is pitched in the same B ♭ as the tenor but with a wider bore, a larger bell, and a larger mouthpiece. These features facilitate playing in the lower register of the instrument. Modern bass trombones have valves that allow a fully chromatic range down to the pedal register (B ♭ 1 ). In Britain, the bass trombone in G was used in orchestras from the mid-19th century and survived into the 1950s, particularly in British brass bands .\n\nThe tenor trombone has a fundamental note of B ♭ and is usually treated as a non-transposing instrument (see below). Tenor trombones with C as their fundamental note were almost equally popular in the mid-19th century in Britain and France. As the trombone in its simplest form has neither crooks, valves nor keys to lower the pitch by a specific interval, trombonists use seven chromatic slide positions . Each position progressively increases the length of the air column, thus lowering the pitch.\n\nExtending the slide from one position to the next lowers the pitch by one semitone . Thus, each note in the harmonic series can be lowered by an interval of up to a tritone . The lowest note of the standard instrument is therefore an E ♮ – a tritone below B ♭ . Most experienced trombonists can play lower \" falset \" notes and much lower pedal notes (first partials or fundamentals, which have a peculiar metallic rumbling sound). Slide positions are subject to adjustment, compensating for imperfections in the tuning of different harmonics. The fifth partial is rather flat on most trombones and usually requires a minute shortening of the slide position to compensate; other small adjustments are also normally required throughout the range. Trombonists make frequent use of alternate positions to minimize slide movement in rapid passages; for instance, B ♭ 3 may be played in first or fifth position. Alternate positions are also needed to allow a player to produce a glissando to or from a higher note on the same partial.\n\nWhile the lowest note of the tenor trombone's range (excluding fundamentals or pedal notes) is E 2 , the trombone's upper range is theoretically open-ended. The practical top of the range is sometimes considered to be F 5 , or more conservatively D 5 . The range of the C tenor trombone is F ♯ 2 to G 5 .\n\nThe alto trombone is smaller than the tenor trombone and almost always pitched in E ♭ a fourth higher than the tenor, although examples pitched in F are occasionally found. Modern instruments are sometimes fitted with a valve to lower the pitch, either by a semitone to D (known as a \"trill\" valve), or by a fourth into B ♭ . The alto trombone was commonly used in the 16th to the 18th centuries in church music to strengthen the alto voice, particularly in the Mass . Early 19th century composers such as Beethoven , Brahms , and Schumann began writing for alto trombone in their symphonies , but the subsequent use and popularity of tenor trombones in the orchestra largely eclipsed their use until a modern revival that began in the late 20th century.\n\nThe soprano trombone is usually pitched in B ♭ an octave above the tenor, and has seldom been used since its first known appearance in 1677 outside of trombone choirs in Moravian Church music . Built with mouthpiece, bore and bell dimensions similar to the B ♭ trumpet , it tends to be played by trumpet players. During the 20th century some soprano trombones—dubbed slide cornets —were made as novelties or for use by jazz players including Louis Armstrong and Dizzy Gillespie . A small number of contemporary proponents of the instrument include jazz artists Wycliffe Gordon and Christian Scott , and classical trumpeter Torbjörn Hultmark, who advocates for its use as an instrument for young children to learn music.\n\nThe sopranino and piccolo trombones appeared in the 1950s as novelty instruments, and are even smaller and higher than the soprano. They are pitched in high E ♭ and B ♭ respectively, one octave above the alto and soprano trombones. Owing to being essentially a slide variant of the piccolo trumpet , they are played primarily by trumpet players.\n\nIn the 19th century as soon as brass instrument valves were invented, trombones with valves instead of slides were adopted widely in orchestras, and remain popular in some parts of Europe and in military bands .\n\nThe cimbasso covers the same range as a tuba or a contrabass trombone . The term cimbasso first appeared in early 19th century Italian opera scores, and originally referred to an upright serpent or an ophicleide . The modern cimbasso first appeared as the trombone basso Verdi in the 1880s and has three to six piston or rotary valves and a predominantly cylindrical bore . They are most often pitched in 12' F, although models are available in E ♭ and occasionally 16' C and 18' B ♭ . The cimbasso is most commonly used in performances of late Romantic Italian operas by Verdi and Puccini , but has also experienced a 21st-century revival in film, television and video game soundtracks.\n\nA hybrid, \"duplex\" or \"double\" trombone is a design of trombone that has both a slide and a set of three valves for altering the pitch. It has been reinvented several times since first appearing in the 19th century by Besson , and later Conn . Jazz trombonist and machinist Brad Gowans invented his \" valide trombone \" in the 1940s with a short four-position slide. In the 1970s Maynard Ferguson and Holton produced the \"Superbone\", very similar to the earlier Conn. In 2013 Schagerl in collaboration with James Morrison announced a larger bore variant with rotary valves.\n\nThe \"flugabone\" (or sometimes \"flugelbone\"), portmanteau of \" flugelhorn \" and \"trombone\", also known as the \"marching trombone\", is a marching brass instrument, essentially a valve trombone wrapped into a compact flugelhorn shape. It retains the cylindrical bore of the trombone, rather than the conical bore of either the flugelhorn or bugle , and thus is similar in playing characteristics to a valve trombone . A similar marching trombone is the \" trombonium \" first produced by King Musical Instruments , wrapped and held vertically like a euphonium .\n\nThe term \"sackbut\" refers to the early forms of the trombone commonly used during the Renaissance and Baroque eras, with a characteristically smaller, more cylindrically proportioned bore , and a less-flared bell .\n\nA distinctive form of tenor trombone was popularized in France in the early 19th century. Called the buccin , it featured a tenor trombone slide and a bell that ended in a zoomorphic (serpent or dragon) head. It sounds like a cross between a trombone and a French horn , with a very wide dynamic range but a limited and variable range of pitch. Hector Berlioz wrote for the buccin in his Messe solennelle of 1824.\n\nA portmanteau of \"trombone\" and \"bassoon\", the \"tromboon\" was created by musical parodist Peter Schickele by replacing a trombone's mouthpiece with the reed and bocal of a bassoon . It appears in several humorous works of Schickele's fictional composer, P. D. Q. Bach .\n\nThe modern system has seven chromatic slide positions on a tenor trombone in B ♭ . It was first described by Andre Braun circa 1795. \n\nIn 1811 Joseph Fröhlich wrote on the differences between the modern system and an old system where four diatonic slide positions were used and the trombone was usually keyed to A. To compare between the two styles the chart below may be helpful (take note for example, in the old system contemporary 1st-position was considered \"drawn past\" then current 1st). In the modern system, each successive position outward (approximately 3 + 1 ⁄ 4 inches [8 cm]) will produce a note which is one semitone lower when played in the same partial . Tightening and loosening the lips will allow the player to \"bend\" the note up or down by a semitone without changing position, so a slightly out-of-position slide may be compensated for by ear.\n\nAs with all brass instruments, progressive tightening of the lips and increased air pressure allow the player to move to different partial in the harmonic series . In the first position (also called closed position) on a B ♭ trombone, the notes in the harmonic series begin with B ♭ 2 (one octave higher than the pedal B ♭ 1 ), F 3 (a perfect fifth higher than the previous partial), B ♭ 3 (a perfect fourth higher), D 4 (a major third higher), and F 4 (a minor third higher).\n\nF 4 marks the sixth partial, or the fifth overtone. Notes on the next partial, for example A ♭ 4 (a minor third higher) in first position, tend to be out of tune in regards to the twelve-tone equal temperament scale. A ♭ 4 in particular, which is at the seventh partial (sixth overtone) is nearly always 31 cents, or about one third of a semitone, flat of the minor seventh. On the slide trombone, such deviations from intonation are corrected for by slightly adjusting the slide or by using an alternate position. Although much of Western music has adopted the even-tempered scale, it has been the practice in Germany and Austria to play these notes in position, where they will have just intonation (see harmonic seventh as well for A ♭ 4 ).\n\nThe next higher partials—B ♭ 4 (a major second higher), C 5 (a major second higher), D 5 (a major second higher)—do not require much adjustment for even-tempered intonation, but E ♭ 5 (a minor second higher) is almost exactly a quarter tone higher than it would be in twelve-tone equal temperament. E ♭ 5 and F 5 (a major second higher) at the next partial are very high notes; a very skilled player with a highly developed facial musculature and diaphragm can go even higher to G 5 , A ♭ 5 , B ♭ 5 and beyond.\n\nThe higher in the harmonic series any two successive notes are, the closer they tend to be (as evidenced by the progressively smaller intervals noted above). A byproduct of this is the relatively few motions needed to move between notes in the higher ranges of the trombone. In the lower range, significant movement of the slide is required between positions, which becomes more exaggerated on lower pitched trombones, but for higher notes the player need only use the first four positions of the slide since the partials are closer together, allowing higher notes in alternate positions. As an example, F 4 (at the bottom of the treble clef) may be played in first, fourth or sixth position on a B ♭ trombone. The note E 1 (or the lowest E on a standard 88-key piano keyboard) is the lowest attainable note on a 9-foot (2.7 m) B ♭ tenor trombone, requiring a full 7 feet 4 inches (2.24 m) of tubing. On trombones without an F attachment, there is a gap between B ♭ 1 (the fundamental in first position) and E 2 (the first harmonic in seventh position). Skilled players can produce \" falset \" notes between these, but the sound is relatively weak and not usually used in performance. The addition of an F attachment allows for intermediate notes to be played with more clarity.\n\nThe B ♭ pedal tone is frequently seen in commercial scoring but much less often in symphonic music, while notes below that are called for only rarely as they \"become increasingly difficult to produce and insecure in quality\" with A ♭ or G being the bottom limit for most tenor trombonists. The trombone's tubing is largely cylindrical, which inhibits the production of the fundamental as a pedal tone pitch. Instead, trombonists use the higher harmonics of the instrument to produce pedal tones, giving them a bright and hollow tone quality. Some contemporary orchestral writing, movie or video game scoring, trombone ensemble and solo works will call for notes as low as a pedal C, B, or even double pedal B ♭ on the bass trombone.\n\nThe trombone is one of the few wind instruments that can produce a true glissando , by moving the slide without interrupting the airflow or sound production. Every pitch in a glissando must have the same harmonic number, and a tritone is the largest interval that can be performed as a glissando. : 151\n\nThe trombone glissando can create remarkable effects, and it is used in jazz and popular music, as in the famous song \" The Stripper \" by David Rose and his orchestra.\n\n'Harmonic', 'inverted', 'broken' or 'false' glissandos are those that cross one or more harmonic series, requiring a simulated or faked glissando effect. \n\nTrills , though generally simple with valves, are difficult on the slide trombone. Trills tend to be easiest and most effective higher in the harmonic series because the distance between notes is much smaller and slide movement is minimal. For example, a trill on B ♭ 3 /C 4 is virtually impossible as the slide must move two positions (either 1st-to-3rd or 5th-to-3rd), however at an octave higher (B ♭ 4 /C 5 ) the notes can both be achieved in 1st position as a lip trill. Thus, the most convincing trills tend to be above the first octave and a half of the tenor's range . Trills are most commonly found in early Baroque and Classical music for the trombone as a means of ornamentation, however, some more modern pieces will call for trills as well.\n\nUnlike most other brass instruments in an orchestral setting, the trombone is not usually considered a transposing instrument . Prior to the invention of valve systems, most brass instruments were limited to playing one overtone series at a time; altering the pitch of the instrument required manually replacing a section of tubing (called a \" crook \") or picking up an instrument of different length. Their parts were transposed according to which crook or length-of-instrument they used at any given time, so that a particular note on the staff always corresponded to a particular partial on the instrument. Trombones, on the other hand, have used slides since their inception. As such, they have always been fully chromatic, so no such tradition took hold, and trombone parts have always been notated at concert pitch (with one exception, discussed below). Also, it was quite common for trombones to double choir parts; reading in concert pitch meant there was no need for dedicated trombone parts. Note that while the fundamental sounding pitch (slide fully retracted) has remained quite consistent, the conceptual pitch of trombones has changed since their origin ( e.g. Baroque A tenor = modern B-flat tenor). \n\nTrombone parts are typically notated in bass clef , though sometimes also written in tenor clef or alto clef . The use of alto clef is usually confined to orchestral first trombone parts, with the second trombone part written in tenor clef and the third (bass) part in bass clef. As the alto trombone declined in popularity during the 19th century, this practice was gradually abandoned and first trombone parts came to be notated in the tenor or bass clef. Some Russian and Eastern European composers wrote first and second tenor trombone parts on one alto clef staff (the German Robert Schumann was the first to do this). Examples of this practice are evident in scores by Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich. Trombone parts in band music are nearly exclusively notated in bass clef. The rare exceptions are in contemporary works intended for high-level wind bands.\n\nAn accomplished performer today is expected to be proficient in reading parts notated in bass clef, tenor clef, alto clef, and (more rarely) treble clef in C, with the British brass-band performer expected to handle treble clef in B ♭ as well.\n\nA variety of mutes can be used with the trombone to alter its timbre . Many are held in place with the use of cork grips, including the straight, cup, harmon and pixie mutes. Some fit over the bell, like the bucket mute. In addition to this, mutes can be held in front of the bell and moved to cover more or less area for a wah-wah effect. Mutes used in this way include the \"hat\" (a metal mute shaped like a bowler hat) and plunger (which looks like, and often is, the rubber suction cup from a sink or toilet plunger ). The \"wah-wah\" sound of a trombone with a harmon mute is featured as the voices of adults in the Peanuts cartoons.\n\nSeveral makers have begun to market compact B ♭ /C trombones that are especially well suited for young children learning to play the trombone who cannot reach the outer slide positions of full-length instruments. The fundamental note of the unenhanced length is C, but the short attachment that puts the instrument in B ♭ has its valve open when the trigger is not depressed. While such instruments have no seventh slide position, C and B natural may be comfortably accessed on the first and second positions by using the trigger. A similar design (\"Preacher model\") was marketed by C.G. Conn in the 1920s, also under the Wurlitzer label. Currently, B ♭ /C trombones are available from many manufacturers, including German makers Günter Frost, Thein and Helmut Voigt, as well as the Yamaha Corporation . \n\nTrombones in slide and valve configuration have been made by a vast array of musical instrument manufacturers. For the brass bands of the late 19th and early 20th century, prominent American manufacturers included Graves and Sons, E. G. Wright and Company, Boston Musical Instrument Company , E. A. Couturier , H. N. White Company/King Musical Instruments , J. W. York , and C.G. Conn . In the 21st century, leading mainstream manufacturers of trombones include Bach , Conn , Courtois, Edwards, Getzen , Jupiter , King, Rath , Schilke, S.E. Shires, Thein, Wessex, Willson and Yamaha .",
  "The koto is a traditional dress from the Afro-Surinamese or Creole women in Suriname . Women who wear the dress are called kotomisi ( misi means miss in Sranan Tongo ).\n\nDifferent kotos exist for various occasions like weddings or funerals. The development of the koto as regular dress is not complete but it is still used in special occasions like the koto-dansi.\n\nWith the koto, women wear a head or body covering called an angisa or anisa . The folding of the angisa sends a social message, for example “Let them talk.”\n\nFor men the traditional clothing is the pangani.",
  "Holocaust Museum LA , formerly known as Los Angeles Museum of the Holocaust , is a museum located in Pan Pacific Park within the Fairfax district of Los Angeles, California. Founded in 1961 by Holocaust survivors , Holocaust Museum LA is the oldest museum of its kind in the United States. Its mission is to commemorate those murdered in the Holocaust, honor those who survived, educate about the Holocaust, and inspire a more dignified and humane world.\n\nHolocaust Museum LA is the oldest museum founded by Holocaust survivors in the United States. In 1961, a group of Holocaust survivors in an English as a second language class at Hollywood High School met and realized their deep connection and drive to steward the past. They began meeting to discuss their personal experiences, and the importance of commemorating their lost relatives and friends and educating future generations. They all had primary sources, such as photographs, artifacts, documents, and memories, and they decided that these objects needed a permanent home – a sanctuary for documentation, commemoration, preservation, and education.\n\nHolocaust Museum LA opened its permanent subterranean building in Pan Pacific Park in October, 2010. Since then, it has had over 500,000 visitors.\n\nPublic programs : Museum admission is free for all students and California residents. Visitors can explore the museum independently and take a self-guided tour using the museum's free audio guide. Staff and docents also offer guided tours throughout the week. The museum offers public events, in-person and online, including conversations with Holocaust survivors, lectures, film screenings and concerts. In 2020, the museum launched \"Building Bridges,\" a cross-cultural discussion series that brings together leaders from diverse communities for conversations about working toward common social justice goals.\n\nStudent education : Museum tours are designed to conform to the California State's curriculum, legislation, and academic standards regarding Holocaust education. In cooperation with teachers, museum staff customize each tour to fit the age level, prior knowledge, background and interests of the students. The museum uses personal narratives, artifact-rich exhibits, and technology to provide access to this history. The “Art & Memory” creative educational programs annually connect survivors with teens, who learn about their own heritage, retell the survivors’ stories, and share their reflections through different art mediums such as film, theatre and photography.\n\nIn 2010, the President of the Museum Board, Randy Schoenberg , led the museum to move into its permanent home, designed by renowned architect Hagy Belzberg. Schoenberg's story of litigating the return of the Klimt painting, Adele Bloch-Bauer I, from Austria was featured in the film Woman in Gold .\n\nThe juxtaposition of the physical building and the surrounding park is a key component in the architectural design of the building. The museum is divided into three spaces: the internal museum space, the Goldrich Family Foundation Children's Memorial, and the outdoor Martyrs Memorial.\n\nAs visitors move through the internal museum the light and space change, mirroring the change of time through history. The galleries are organized chronologically and cover Jewish life before the Holocaust, as well as key historical events between 1933 and 1945. The museum features a collection of primary sources, and Holocaust Museum LA holds one of the largest collections in the United States of artifacts from the Holocaust period. \n\nThe Children's Memorial is an outdoor reflective space where the approximately 1.5 million children who were murdered in the Holocaust are remembered. There are 1.2 million holes of various sizes in the walls of the Children's Memorial, and visitors can write messages to the children. A small Garden of the Righteous pays homage to non-Jews who risked their lives to save others.\n\nFinally, the Martyr's Memorial monument, which was built in the early 1990s, consists of six 18-foot-high (5.5 m) triangular, black granite pillars. Each one honors the 6 million Jews who were murdered in the Holocaust. These pillars are also meant to symbolize the crematoria smokestacks. \n\nThe building design received the Los Angeles Cultural Affairs Commission Design Honor Award, the Green Building Design Award, and a Gold LEED rating – the national standard of sustainable architecture. The award-winning interior and exterior architecture reflect the poignant history covered in the museum's galleries.\n\nBecause the number of visitors to the museum increased by 400% since 2011, an expansion was planned in 2021. The Jona Goldrich Campus will be designed by architect Hagy Belzberg, with new indoor and outdoor spaces that will double its footprint in Pan Pacific Park. The museum hopes to amplify its reach and impact and increase its visibility. In June 2022, Susan and Eric Smidt donated $5 million toward the development of the Jona Goldrich Campus. \n\nA new Learning Center Pavilion along The Grove Drive, adjacent to the existing building, will include a dedicated theater for USC Shoah Foundation’s Dimensions in Testimony. This 200-seat theater will be used for film screenings, concerts, conferences and public programs. The Learning Center Pavilion will also have outdoor reflective spaces, two classrooms for large student groups and programs for younger audiences, and 2,500 sq. ft. of special exhibit space. In addition, a new Boxcar Pavilion built to house an authentic boxcar found outside of Majdanek death camp in Poland will be constructed on top of the existing building. \n\n34°03′50″N 118°22′09″W ﻿ / ﻿ 34.063886°N 118.369285°W ﻿ / 34.063886; -118.369285",
  "Robin Hood is a 1973 American animated musical adventure comedy film produced by Walt Disney Productions and released by Buena Vista Distribution . Produced and directed by Wolfgang Reitherman , it is based on the English folktale \" Robin Hood \". Taking place in a world populated by anthropomorphic animals, the story follows the adventures of Robin Hood , Little John , and the inhabitants of Nottingham as they fight against the excessive taxation of Prince John , and Robin Hood wins the hand of Maid Marian . The film features the voices of Brian Bedford , Phil Harris , Peter Ustinov , Pat Buttram , Monica Evans , Terry-Thomas , Roger Miller , and Carole Shelley .\n\nThe idea to adapt Robin Hood into an animated feature was dated back to Walt Disney 's interest in the tale of Reynard the Fox following the release of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937). The idea was repeatedly shelved for several decades. In 1968, Ken Anderson pitched a film adaptation of Robin Hood, incorporating ideas from Reynard the Fox by using anthropomorphic animals rather than humans. The project was approved, becoming the first completely \"post-Walt\" animated feature and the first with an entirely non-human cast.\n\nRobin Hood was released on November 8, 1973. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but it was nonetheless a box-office success, grossing $33 million worldwide against a production budget of $5 million. Although some retrospective reviews have criticized the heavy use of animation recycled from previous Disney films, the film's reputation has grown positively over time and has since become a cult classic .\n\nMinstrel Alan-a-Dale narrates the story. While crossing Sherwood Forest , Robin Hood and Little John narrowly escape capture by the Sheriff of Nottingham and his archers . They learn that the arrogant, greedy, and immature Prince John will be traveling through the forest. They rob his caravan, embarrassing the Prince who promises revenge. Robin and Little John distribute the Prince's wealth among the starving and overtaxed villagers of Nottingham . Robin also gives a hat and bow to young Skippy Rabbit for the latter's birthday. Trying out the bow, Skippy accidentally fires an arrow into the courtyard of Prince John's castle. While retrieving it, Skippy and his friends meet Maid Marian and her lady-in-waiting Lady Kluck. Skippy's hat reminds Marian of Robin Hood, and she reveals that they were childhood sweethearts. She wonders if Robin still remembers her.\n\nMeanwhile, Robin is thinking of Marian at his and Little John's forest hideaway. Local priest Friar Tuck brings news that Prince John will be hosting an archery tournament; the grand prize will be a kiss from Maid Marian. Robin and Little John, disguised as a Devonshire stork and (respectively) the Duke of Chutney, win the competition; however, Prince John sees through Robin's disguise and sentences him to death. Marian pleads for Robin's life; while they proclaim their love for each other, Little John gets Robin released by threatening Prince John with a dagger in his back. Suddenly the Sheriff of Nottingham intervenes, and Prince John again orders Robin's death. The Nottingham villagers fight Prince John's soldiers. During the fight, Robin proposes to Marian, which she accepts. Robin, Marian, Lady Kluck, and Little John escape.\n\nRobin and Marian share a romantic evening, which is disrupted by the partying of the Nottingham villagers. They sing “The Phony King of England”, about Prince John's fraud and incompetence; the song becomes popular even among Prince John's own advisors. The Prince angrily triples the taxes on the villagers, all of whom are soon jailed when their money runs out. Visiting Friar Tuck's now-empty church, the Sheriff takes a gold coin from the poor box. When Friar Tuck attempts to get the coin back, he is arrested for high treason . Prince John orders his execution as bait to trap Robin Hood.\n\nThe night before the execution, Robin and Little John break into the jail. They free the villagers, who make off with Prince John's wealth. Sir Hiss, ostensibly the Prince's aide-de-camp but in fact his whipping boy , tries to stop the breakout by rousing the castle. The villagers escape, but Robin is trapped while rescuing Skippy's younger sister Tagalong. The Sheriff chases Robin with a lit torch, setting the castle on fire. Cornered, Robin evades Prince John's archers by diving from a turret into the moat. Sir Hiss criticizes Prince John for the plot, which resulted in his mother's castle being destroyed. Infuriated, the Prince chases Hiss through the flames.\n\nLater on, King Richard returns from the Crusades. He puts Prince John, Sir Hiss, and the Sheriff of Nottingham in prison. Richard also pardons Robin Hood and forgives the villagers' taxes. Robin and Marian are married and ride off together.\n\n\"As director of story and character concepts, I knew right off that sly Robin Hood must be a fox. From there it was logical that Maid Marian should be a pretty vixen. Little John, legendarily known for his size, was easily a big overgrown bear.\n\nFriar Tuck is great as a badger, but he was also great as a pig, as I had originally planned. Then I thought the symbol of a pig might be offensive to the Church , so we changed him. Richard the Lion-hearted, of course, had to be a regal, proud, strong lion; and his pathetic cousin [historically, and in the movie, his brother] Prince John, the weak villain, also had to be a lion, but we made him scrawny and childish. I originally thought of a snake as a member of the poor townspeople but one of the other men here suggested that a snake would be perfect as a slithering consort [Sir Hiss] to mean Prince John.\"\n\nDuring production on Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs in 1937, Walt Disney became interested in adapting the twelfth-century legend of Reynard the Fox. However, the project languished due to Disney's concern that Reynard was an unsuitable choice for a hero. In a meeting held on February 12, 1938, Disney commented:\n\nI see swell possibilities in 'Reynard', but is it smart to make it? We have such a terrific kid audience ... parents and kids together. That's the trouble – too sophisticated. We'll take a nosedive doing it with animals. \n\nFor Treasure Island (1950), Disney seriously considered three animated sections, each one of the Reynard tales, to be told by Long John Silver to Jim Hawkins as moral fables. Ultimately, the idea was nixed as Treasure Island became the studio's first fully live-action film. In the next decade, the studio decided to make Reynard the villain of a musical feature film based on Edmond Rostand 's Chanticleer , but the production was scrapped in favor of The Sword in the Stone (1963). \n\nIn October 1968, Ken Anderson went on a fishing trip with Disney Studios president Card Walker . There, Walker suggested that a classic tale should be the subject for the next animated film after The Aristocats (1970). Anderson proposed the tale of Robin Hood , to which Walker responded enthusiastically. Back at the studio, Anderson relayed the idea during a story meeting on The Aristocats which was met with approval. In a follow-up meeting, with Wolfgang Reitherman , Bill Anderson (no relation), and Larry Clemmons , Ken Anderson was assigned the job to begin \"exploratory animal character drawings\". On his own, Anderson blended his ideas for the character Robin Hood by conceptualizing him as a slick fox that still used his skills to protect the community. \n\nAdditionally, Anderson wanted to set the film in the Deep South desiring to recapture the spirit of Song of the South (1946). Anderson explained, \"Basically I had a wonderful time on Song of the South , and I know that all of my friends in animation did. They loved the part I played and I loved the part they played ... And so it was an attempt on my part to get the best of that sort of thing and get it going on again, bring it up-to-date.\" However, the Disney Studios executives had precautions because of the racial controversy surrounding Song of the South . Reitherman further overruled Anderson's creative suggestion by setting the film in its traditional English location as inspired by The Story of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men (1952). Clemmons came on board the project to write a story outline with dialogue that was later storyboarded by other artists. \n\nAs production went further along, Robin Allan stated in his book Walt Disney and Europe that \"Ken Anderson wept when he saw how his character concepts had been processed into stereotypes for the animation on Robin Hood .\" According to Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston , one such casualty was the concept of making the Sheriff of Nottingham a goat as an artistic experiment to try different animals for a villain, only to be overruled by Reitherman who wanted to keep to the villainous stereotype of a wolf instead. Additionally, Anderson wanted to include the Merry Men into the film, which was again overridden by Reitherman because he wanted a \" buddy picture \" reminiscent of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969). Little John was the only Merry Man retained in the film, while Friar Tuck was put as a friend of Robin's who lived in Nottingham, and Alan-a-Dale was turned into the narrator.\n\nBecause of the time spent on developing several settings, and auditioning actors to voice the title character, production fell behind schedule. In order to meet its deadline, the animators had no other choice but to recycle several dance sequences from previous Disney animated films, including Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), The Jungle Book (1967), and The Aristocats (1970) that are used in the \"Phony King of England\" scene. \n\nBy October 1970, most of the voice actors were confirmed, with the exception of Tommy Steele cast in the title role. Steele himself was chosen because of his performance in The Happiest Millionaire (1967) while Peter Ustinov was cast because Walt Disney had enjoyed his presence on the set of Blackbeard's Ghost (1968). However, Steele was unable to make his character sound more heroic, and his replacement came down to final two candidates which were Bernard Fox and Brian Bedford . Disney executives had first seen Bedford performing onstage in Los Angeles, in which they brought him in to test for the role in May 1971 and ultimately cast him. Meanwhile, Louis Prima was so angered at not being considered for a role that he personally paid the recording expenses for the subsequent album, Let's \"Hear\" it For Robin Hood , which he sold to Disneyland Records . \n\nThe film premiered at the Radio City Music Hall on November 8, 1973. The film was re-released on March 26, 1982.\n\nThe film was first released on VHS, CED, Betamax, and Laserdisc on December 3, 1984, becoming the debut installment of the Walt Disney Classics home video line. Disney had thought the idea of releasing any of its animated classics (known as the \"untouchables\") might threaten future theatrical reissue revenue. However, Robin Hood was viewed as the first choice since it was not held in such high esteem as some of the other titles. The VHS counterpart was re-released several times. The release went into moratorium in April 1987. 4 years after the moratorium, it was re-issued as a permanent availability title on July 12, 1991. The film was re-released on VHS six more times; on October 28, 1994, March 3, 1995, February 28, 1996, July 15, 1997, March 31, 1998, and July 13, 1999, in the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection line.\n\nIn January 2000, Walt Disney Home Video launched the Gold Classic Collection. Six months later, Robin Hood was re-released on VHS and DVD in the line on July 4, 2000, and remained in stock until the spring of 2006. The DVD contained the film in its 1.33:1 aspect ratio , and was accompanied with special features including a trivia game and the cartoon short \" Ye Olden Days \". The remastered \"Most Wanted Edition\" DVD (\"Special Edition\" in the UK) was released on November 28, 2006, in a 16:9 matted transfer to represent its original theatrical screen ratio. It also featured a deleted scene/alternate ending of Prince John attempting to kill a wounded Robin Hood. On August 6, 2013, the film was released as the 40th Anniversary Edition on a Blu-ray combo pack. \n\nJudith Crist , reviewing the film in New York magazine, said it was \"nicely tongue-in-cheek without insult to the intelligence of either child or adult.\" She also stated that it \"has class – in the fine cast that gives both voice and personality to the characters, in the bright and brisk dialogue, in its overall concept.\" Vincent Canby of The New York Times wrote that it \"should ... be a good deal of fun for toddlers whose minds have not yet shriveled into orthodoxy\" and he called the visual style \"charmingly conventional\". Dave Billington of The Montreal Gazette wrote \"As a film, Robin Hood marks a come-back of sorts for the Disney people. Ever since the old maestro died, the cartoon features have shown distressing signs of a drop in quality, both in art work and in voice characterization. But the blending of appealing cartoon animals with perfect voices for the part makes Robin Hood an excellent evening out for the whole family.\" Also writing in New York magazine, Ruth Gilbert called it \"a sweet, funny, slam-bang, good-hearted Walt Disney feature cartoon with a fine cast\" and wrote it was \"a feast for the eyes for kiddies and Disney nostalgics.\" \n\nCharles Champlin of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the Disney \"hallmarks are there as they ever were: the incomparably rich, full animation, the humanized animal characters perky, individual and enchanting, and the wild, inventive slapstick action.\" Awarding the film four stars out of five, Ian Nathan, in a retrospective review for Empire , praised the vocal performances of Peter Ustinov and Terry-Thomas acknowledging \"while this is hardly the most dazzling of animated features, it has that cut-corner feel that seem to hold sway in the '70s (mainly because Disney were cutting corners), the characters spark to life, and the story remains as rock steady as ever.\" \n\nAmong less favorable reviews, Jay Cocks of Time gave the film a mixed verdict writing, \"Even at its best, Robin Hood is only mildly diverting. There is not a single moment of the hilarity or deep, eerie fear that the Disney people used to be able to conjure up, or of the sort of visual invention that made the early features so memorable. Robin Hood ' s basic problem is that it is rather too pretty and good natured.\" Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune gave the film one-and-a-half stars out of four, describing the film as \"80 minutes of pratfalls and nincompoop dialog,\" and criticizing the animation quality as \"Saturday morning TV cartoon stuff.\" John Baxter of The Monthly Film Bulletin wrote that \"for the most part the film is as bland and one-dimensional as the product of less sophisticated studios; and except for Peter Ustinov's plummy Prince John, the voice characterisations are as insipid as the animation is unoriginal.\" \n\nDecades since the film's release, the film has been noted for the recycled scenes of animation. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that the film received a 58% approval rating with an average rating of 5.7/10 based on 31 reviews. The website's consensus states that \"One of the weaker Disney adaptations, Robin Hood is cute and colorful but lacks the majesty and excitement of the studio's earlier efforts.\" Metacritic gave the film a score of 57 based on 9 reviews, indicating \"mixed or average reviews\". \n\nDuring its initial release, Robin Hood earned $9.6 million in rentals in the United States and Canada. It also grossed $18 million in foreign territories, which was at the time a Disney record, for a worldwide rental of $27.5 million. \n\nThe film has earned a lifetime gross in the United States and Canada between $32–35 million across its two releases. \n\nIn 1969, Roger Miller began composing the songs for the film. A record of the film was made at the time of its release in 1973, which included its songs, score, narration, and dialogue. Both \"Oo-De-Lally\" and \"Love\" appear on the CD collection, Classic Disney: 60 Years of Musical Magic . \"Love\" is featured in the soundtrack for the 2009 film Fantastic Mr. Fox , directed by Wes Anderson . The full soundtrack of the film was released on August 4, 2017, as part of the Walt Disney Records: The Legacy Collection series on compact disc and digital. \n\nThe song \"The Phony King of England\" bears a strong resemblance to a much older, bawdy English folk song, \" The Bastard King of England \". \n\nOriginal songs performed in the film include:\n\nThe film has since become a fan favorite. Disney animator and director Byron Howard admitted that Robin Hood was his favorite film while growing up and cited it as a major influence on Zootopia . It was also one of the many inspirations for the then-emerging furry fandom . Some of the characters from the film also cameoed in the 1983 Oscar-nominated featurette short Mickey's Christmas Carol . The film was nominated for a spot on AFI's 10 Top 10 by American Film Institute in 2008 for the Animated Film list. \n\nThe song \" Love \" was featured in the 2009 feature film Fantastic Mr. Fox . as well as on the 2023 Amazon.com Super Bowl ad \"Saving Sawyer\". The song \"Whistle-Stop\" was sped up and used in the Hampster Dance , one of the earliest internet memes, and later used at normal speed in the Super Bowl XLVIII commercial for T-Mobile . The song \"Oo De Lally\" is featured in a 2015 commercial for Android which shows animals of different species playing together. \n\nRobin Hood, Little John, Maid Marian, Prince John and Sir Hiss appear as playable characters in the video game Disney Magic Kingdoms , along with attractions based on Sherwood Forest and Nottingham. In the game, the characters are involved in new storylines that serve as a continuation of the events of the film. \n\nIn April 2020, it was reported that Disney was developing a live-action / CG hybrid remake of Robin Hood featuring the same kind of anthropomorphic characters as in the 1973 film, with Kari Granlund writing, Carlos Lopez Estrada directing (after previously directing the Academy Award -nominated Raya and the Last Dragon ), and Justin Springer producing. The remake was set to be released exclusively on Disney+ . ",
  "Yakshagana is a traditional theatre, found in Dakshina Kannada , Udupi , Kasaragod district and Uttara Kannada , Shimoga and western parts of Chikmagalur districts, in the state of Karnataka and in Kasaragod district in Kerala that combines dance, music, dialogue, costume, make-up, and stage techniques with a unique style and form. It is believed to have evolved from pre-classical music and theatre during the period of the Bhakti movement. This theatre style is mainly found in coastal regions of Karnataka in various forms. Towards the south from Dakshina Kannada to Kasaragod of Tulu Nadu region, the form of Yakshagana is called Thenku thittu and towards the north from Udupi up to Uttara Kannada it is called Badaga thittu . Both of these forms are equally played all over the region. Yakshagana is traditionally presented from dusk to dawn. Its stories are drawn from Ramayana , Mahabharata , Bhagavata and other epics from both Hindu and Jain and other ancient Indic traditions. \n\nYakshagāna literally means the song ( gāna ) of the yaksha (nature spirits). Yakshagana is the scholastic name in Kannada (used for the last 200 years) for art forms formerly known as āṭao, kēḷike, bayalāṭa , and daśāvatāra . The word āṭao which was originally played in Tulu during 12th century in Udupi, later it was called as Yakshagana referred to a form of literature primarily in Kannada (starting from the 16th century). Yakshaganas are available in Tulu , Kannada and even now in Telugu. Performance of this Yakshagana literature or the play is called āṭao. It is now no longer believed that the word Ekkalagaana refers to Yakshagana.\n\nYakshagana has a separate tradition of music, separate from Karnataka Sangeetha and the Hindustani music of India. Yakshagana and Karnatak Sangeetha may have a common ancestor are not decedents of one another. \n\nA typical Yakshagana performance consists of background music played by a group of musicians (known as a himmela ); and a dance and dialogue group (known as the mummela ), who together enact poetic epics on stage. The himmela is made up of a lead singer ( bhagawatha )—who also directs the production—and is referred to as the \"first actor\" ( modalane vesha ). Additional himmela members are players of traditional musical instruments, such as the maddale (hand drum), the pungi (pipe), the harmonium (organ), and the chande (loud drums). The music is based on ragas , which are characterised by rhythmic patterns called mattu and tala (or musical meter in Western music).\n\nA Yakshagana(ಯಕ್ಷಗಾನ) performance typically begins in the twilight hours, with an initial beating of the drums of several fixed compositions, called abbara or peetike . This may last for up to an hour before the actors finally arrive on the stage. The actors wear resplendent costumes, head-dresses, and face paints. \n\nA performance usually depicts a story from the \" Kavya \" (epic poems) and the \" Puranas \" (ancient Hindu texts). It consists of a story teller (the bhagawatha ) who narrates the story by singing (which includes prepared character dialogues) as the actors dance to the music, portraying elements of the story as it is being narrated. All components of Yakshagana—including the music, the dance, and the dialogue—are improvised. Depending on the ability and scholarship of the actors, there will be variations in dances as well as the amount of dialogue. It is not uncommon for actors to get into philosophical debates or arguments without falling out of character. The acting in Yakshagana can be best categorised as method acting . [ citation needed ] The performances have drawn comparison to the Western tradition of opera. Traditionally, Yakshagana will run through dusk to dawn.\n\nYakshagana is popular in the districts of Dakshina Kannada , Kasaragod , Udupi , Uttara Kannada , Shimoga and western parts of Chikkamagaluru . Yakshagana has become popular in Bengaluru in recent years, particularly in the rainy season, when there are few other forms of entertainment possible in the coastal districts. \n\nTraditional\n\nYakshagana can refer to a style of writing, as well as the written material itself. It was probably used for poems enacted in bayalaata (or open theatre drama ), such as the ballads of Koti and Chennayya . Yakshagana in its present form is believed to have been strongly influenced by the Vaishnava Bhakti movement . Yakshagana was first introduced in Udupi in Tulu during 12th century by Madhvacharya 's disciple Naraharitirtha . Naraharitirtha was the minister in the Kalinga Kingdom. He also was the founder of Kuchipudi .\n\nThe first written evidence regarding Yakshagana is found on an inscription at the Lakshminarayana Temple in Kurugodu , Somasamudra, Bellary District , and is dated 1556 CE. A copy is available at the University of Madras. The inscription mentions land donated to the performers of the art, so as to enable people to enjoy tala maddale programs at the temple. Another important piece of evidence is available in the form of a poem authored by Ajapura Vishnu, the Virata Parva , inscribed on a palm-leaf found at Ajapura (present day Brahmavara). Another historic palm-leaf manuscript, dated 1621 CE, describes Sabhalakshana . \n\nYakshagana bears some resemblance to other members of the 'traditional theatre family:' Ankhia Nata (found in Assam ); Jathra (in Bengal ); Chau ( Bihar , Bengal); Prahlada Nata ( Orissa ); Veedhinatakam & Chindu ( Andhra ); Terukoothu Bhagawathamela ( Tamil Nadu ), and Kathakali (Kerala). However, some researchers have argued that Yakshagana is markedly different from this group. [ citation needed ]\n\nExperts have placed the origin of Yakshagana somewhere in the period of the 11th to 16th centuries CE. Yakshagana was an established performance art form by the time of the noted Yakshagana poet, Parthi Subba (c. 1600). His father, Venkata, is attributed by some to be the author of the great Hindu epic, Ramayana , although historian Shivaram Karanth counters these claims (made most notably by historians Muliya Thimmappa and Govinda Pai) and argues that it is Subba, who was in fact its author. Venkata is the probable founder of the tenkuthittu (southern) style of the art. [ citation needed ]\n\nTroupe centers, such as Kudlu and Kumbla in the Kasaragod District , and Amritheshwari , Kota near Kundapura , claim to have had troupes three to four centuries ago, indicating that the art form almost certainly had begun to take shape by circa 1500.\n\nThe Yakshagana form of today is the result of a slow evolution, drawing its elements from ritual theatre, temple arts, secular arts (such as Bahurupi ), royal courts of the past, and the artists' imaginations—all interwoven over a period of several hundred years. \n\nEarly Yakshagana poets included Ajapura Vishnu, Purandaradasa , Parthi Subba, and Nagire Subba. King Kanteerava Narasaraja Wodeyar II (1704–1714) authored 14 Yakshaganas in various languages in the Kannada script. [ a ] Mummadi Krishnaraja Wodeyar (1794–1868) also wrote several Yakshagana prasanga, including Sougandhika Parinaya . [ b ] Noted poet, Muddana , composed several Yakshagana prasanga's, including the very popular Rathnavathi Kalyana .\n\nIn the 19th century, Yakshagana began to move away from the strict traditional forms. Practitioners of the day produced a number of new compositions. Also, a large number of troupes arose across coastal Karnataka .\n\nThe early 20th century saw the birth of 'tent' troupes, giving performances to audiences made up of common people who were admitted by ticket. These troupes were responsible for the commercialisation of Yakshagana. The genre saw major changes in form and organisation. Electrical lights replaced the gas lights; seating arrangements improved; the inclusion of folk epics, Sanskrit dramas, and fictional stories formed the modern thematic base of the discipline. Popular entertainment became the criterion, replacing the historic classical presentations.\n\nAt this time, writer Kota Shivaram Karanth, experimented with the dance form by introducing Western musical instrumentation. He reduced the time of a Yakshagana performances from 12 hours to under three hours, incorporated movie plot lines, and added Shakespearean themes. Today, female artists perform in Yakshagana shows.\n\nYakshagana is related to other performance art forms prevalent in other parts of Karnataka and the neighbouring states of Andhra Pradesh , Kerala , Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra . Yakshagana defies simple classification into categories such as folk, classical, or rural. It can be included in each or all of these, depending upon the rules used for classification. It is more varied and dynamic than most dance forms. Yakshagana can, however, be classified as one of many traditional dance forms. While it prevails primarily in the coastal areas of Karnataka, other dance forms (such as Doddata) are today often called by the same name. Several forms of traditional theatre – Mudalpaya (of southern Karnataka); Doddata (of northern Karnataka); Kelike (on the border with Andhra Pradesh ); and Ghattadakore (of Kollegal —in the Chamarajnagar District ), may be included in this category. Among them, the Ghattadakore is a direct branch of the coastal form of Yakshagana, while Mudalapaya is the most closely connected form. [ citation needed ]\n\nThere is a form called Yakshaganamu in Andhra Pradesh , which exhibits some resemblance to the Yakshagana forms of the Karnataka plateau region and is less sophisticated as a visual art. \n\nScholars have classified Yakshagana broadly into several types:\n\nOne of the traditional variations, the tenkutittu style, is prevalent in Dakshina Kannada, Kasaragod District, western parts of Coorg (Sampaje), and few areas of Udupi district. The influence of Karnatic Music is apparent in tenkutittu, as evidenced by the type of maddale used and in bhaagavathike. Yakshagana is influenced more by folk art blended with classical dance aspects. In tenkutittu, three iconic set of colours are used: the Raajabanna , the Kaatbanna , and the Sthreebanna .\n\nThe himmela in the tenkutittu style is more cohesive to the entire production. Rhythms of the chande and maddale coupled with the chakrataala and jaagate of the bhaagavatha create an excellent symphonic sound. The dance form in tenkutittu strikes the attention of the audience by 'Dheengina' or 'Guttu'. Performers often do dhiginas (jumping spins in the air) and will continuously spin (sometimes) hundreds of times. Tenkutittu is noted for its incredible dance steps; its high flying dance moves; and its extravagant rakshasas (demons).\n\nTenkutittu has remained a popular form and has its own audience outside the coastal areas. The Dharmasthala and Kateelu durgaparameshwari melas (the two most popular melas) have helped to popularise this form. Several creative tenkutittu plays have been composed by noted scholars, such as Amritha Someshwara. \n\nThe Badagutittu style is prevalent in North Canara (Uttara Kannada District) and the northern parts of Udupi district from Kundapura to Byndoor. The Badagutittu school of Yakshagana places more emphasis on facial expressions, matugarike (dialogues), and dances appropriate for the character depicted in the episode. It makes use of a typical Karnataka chande. \n\nThe Badagutittu style was popularised by Shivram Karanth 's, \"Yakshagana Mandira,\" presented at Saligrama Village in Dakshina Kannada as a shorter more modern form of Yakshagana. \n\nKeremane Shivarama Hegde , the founder of the Yakshagana troupe, Idagunji Mahaganapati Yakshagana Mandali, is an exponent of the Badagutittu style of Yakshagana. He is also the first Yakshagana artist to receive the Rashtrapati Award from the president of India . He hails from the Honnavar taluk of Uttara Kannada (North Canara) District.\n\nThere were more than 30 string-puppet troupes in the undivided Dakshina Kannada district during the period 1910–1915 in places such as Basrur, Barkur, Kokkarne, Mudabidri . The presentation of the puppetry in Yakshagana style is highly stylised and adheres strictly to the norms and standards of Yakshagana. The puppets (generally 18 inches high) wear costumes similar to those worn by live actors of Yakshagana, and have the same elaborate make-up, colourful headgear, and heavy jewellery. The puppeteer is known as the Suthradhara. The content in the Yakshagana puppetry, is also mainly drawn from the ancient epics. \n\nYakshagana puppetry has existed for centuries. The modern form of the art, however, was largely moulded by the brothers Laxman, Narasimha, and Manjappa Kamath; who hailed from Uppinakudru village, Kundapur taluk. Devanna Padmanabha Kamath, the grandson of Laxman Kamath infused new life into the art and performed shows all over India. Later, Kogga Devanna Kamath improved this subgenre even further, being recognised with the Tulsi Samman and Sangeet Natak Akademi Awards . His son, Bhaskar Kogga Kamath, is currently performing shows while training others in the art of Yakshagana puppetry. K. V. Ramesh is a leading puppeteer from Kasaragod. He leads the Yakshagana puppet troupe Shri Gopalakrishna Yakshagana Gombeyata Sangha. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe second half of the 20th century saw experiments and adoptions of this art into other venues. One notable effort was that of Shivarama Karantha , who produced and exhibited Yakshagana ballet , using and training local artists. Some of the changes brought about by Karanth, however, attracted criticism. One legal decision even banned any public performance of his experimental ballets being billed as \"Yakshagana.\" [ citation needed ]\n\nThe artists pray to lord Ganesha before their performance. Yakshagana also ends with a prayer to Ganesha \n\nYakshagana Rāga refers to melodic framework used in Yakshagana. It is based on pre-classical melodic forms that comprise a series of five or more musical notes upon which a melody is founded. Ragas in Yakshagana are closely associated with a set of melodic forms called mattu. In the Yakshagana tradition, rāgas are associated with different times of the night throughout which the Yakshagana is performed.\n\nYakshagana Tala ( Sanskrit tāla) are frameworks for rhythms in Yakshagana that are determined by a poetry style called Yakshagana Padya . Tala also decide how a composition is to be enacted by the dancers. It is similar to tala in other forms of Indian music, but differs from them structurally. Each composition is set to one or more talas, rendered by the himmela percussion artists play. \n\nYakshagana poetry (Yakshagana Padya or Yakshagana Prasanga) is a collection of poems written to form a music drama. The poems are composed in well known Kannada metres, using a frame work of ragas and talas . Yakshagana also has its own metre (or prosody ). The collection of Yakshagana poems forming a musical drama is called a Prasanga . The oldest surviving parasanga books are believed to have been composed in the 15th century. But many compositions have been lost to time. There is evidence showing that oral compositions were in use before the 15th century. The narratives of the surviving historic Yakshagana Prasangas are now often printed in paperback. \n\nYakshagna costumes are rich in colour. The costumes (or vesha ) in Tulu depend on characters depicted in the play (prasanga). It also depends on the Yakshagana style ( tittu ).\n\nTraditionally, Badagutittu Yakshagana ornaments are made out of light wood, pieces of mirror, and coloured stones. Lighter materials, such as thermocol, are sometimes used today, although ornaments are still predominantly made of woodwork.\n\nYakshagana costumes consist of headgear (Kirita or Pagade), Kavacha that decorates the chest, Buja Keerthi (armlets) that decorate the shoulders, and belts (Dabu)—all made up of light wood and covered with golden foil. Mirror work on these ornaments helps to reflect light during shows and add more color to the costumes. Armaments are worn on a vest and cover the upper half of the body. The lower half is covered with kachche , which come in unique combinations of red, yellow, and orange checks. Bulky pads are used under the kachche, making the actors' proportions different in size from normal.\n\nThe character, Bannada Vesha, is used to depict monsters. This often involves detailed facial makeup taking three to four hours to complete. Males play the female roles in traditional Yakshagana. However, more recently, yakshagana has seen female artists, who perform in both male and female roles.\n\nThe character of Stree Vesha makes use of sari and other decorative ornaments.\n\nThe maddale is a percussion instrument and, along with the chande, is the primary rhythmic accompaniment in the Yakshagana ensemble. It is played in a similar fashion as Mridangam.\n\nYakshagana bells or cymbals, are a pair of finger bells made of a special alloy (traditionally five metal). They are made to fit the tone of the bhagawatha's voice. Singers carry more than one set, as finger bells are available in different keys, thus enabling them to sing in different pitches. They help create and guide the background music in Yakshagana.\n\nThe Chande is a drum and, along with the maddale, is an important rhythmic accompaniment in the Yakshagana ensemble.\n\nOver the centuries, hundreds of artists performed Yakshagana and some of them have gained star value, like Keremane Shivarama Hegde , Kuriya Vithala Shastry, Keremane Shambhu Hegde, Soorikumeru Govinda Bhat, Keremane Mahabala Hegde, Chittani Ramachandra Hegde , Naranappa Uppoor , Balipa Narayana Bhagawat, Karki Krishna Hasyagara and Kalinga Navada .\n\nAs most troupes are associated with temples, training in the art has been confined to temple premises. The Govinda Pai Research Institute, located at MGM College, runs a Yakshagana Kalakendra in Udupi trains youngsters in this ancient dance form. It also does research work on language, rituals, and dance art forms. Srimaya Yakshagana Kalakendra, Gunavante which was founded by Shri Keremane Shambhu Hegde, is another notable Yakshagana Gurukula that trains Yakshagana students .\n\nYakshagana is finding new popularity outside India. Amateur troupes have emerged in California , USA and Ontario , Canada. Yakshamitra in Canada , Yakshagana Kalavrinda , Yaksharanga in the U.S. \"Yakshaloka Boston\" are a few examples of these international troupes.\n\nYakshamitra founded in 2008 in Toronto , Canada, is the first full pledged Yakshagana mela outside India. It is the first to use local live music himmela for their performances. The other troupes usually use a recorded background himmela for their shows.\n\n\"Yakshaloka USA\" was founded in New England by Raghuram Shetty in 1995 and used recorded audio for shows. Being the first build a local Yakshagana troupe (\"Yakshaloka Boston\") in North America and introduce tenku tittu (Southern style) Yakshagana to this continent, he trained thousands of local Americans and inspired 5 Yakshagana troupes (Massachusetts, Washington, Florida, Northern and Southern California). Including shows like Sindh World Conference 2000, AKKA 2002, Saint Peters-burg Folk Festival 2005, Irvine Global Village 2014 etc. Yakshaloka USA has showcased hundreds of multi-lingual shows in major theatres across USA in both styles of Yakshagana. Yakshaloka promotes vibrant ancient Indian art by creating unique shows of its own, presentations in schools and Universities including worlds leading acting schools in Hollywood, training kids and adults from all over the world, joining hands with visiting artists (E.g.: Northern style legend Chittani Ramachandra Hegde troupe 2006), and sponsoring/facilitating leading artists (E.g.: Southern style legend Dr Puttur Shridhara Bhandary 2013).\n\nYakshagana Kalavrinda performs on the east coast of the U.S.\n\"Yakshaloka Boston\" troupe has mainly the artists from Boston area and visiting artists from various parts of USA and India. The troupe has given many shows in the east coast, Midwest, southern USA.\n\nYaksharanga in the USA started after the visit of Yakshagana artist, Sri Chittani Ramachandra Hegde . His performance at the age of 74 was so inspiring that art lovers decided to continue his art thousands of miles away from its home. Sri Kidayuru Ganesh, who accompanied Sri Chittani, stayed back for a couple of months to train a new generation of Yakshagana artists. The initial result was a performance of Yakshagana \"Sudanvarjuna Kalaga\". Hegde won the Padmashri Award in 2012 for his lifetime contribution to the art. Yaksharanga has since performed many shows around California.\n\nYakshagana Troupe, \" Shri Idagunji Mahaganapati Yakshagana Mandali, Keremane ,\" headed by Shri Keremane Shambhu Hegde and Shri Keremane Shivanand Hegde, toured the U.S., and performed more than 22 programs throughout North America. The troupe visited 12 countries. This troupe was one of the first few troupes that took Yakshagana (in its traditional form) outside India (referring to their performance at Hilton Hotel, Bahrain in 1983).\n\nThere are about 30 full-fledged professional troupes, and about 200 amateur troupes in Yakshagana. Professional troupes go on tour between November and May, giving about 180–200 shows. There are about one thousand professional artists and many more amateurs. Further there are off season shows during the wet season, the anniversary shows, school and college students Yakshagana and of course the Talamaddale performances. Yakshagana commercial shows witness 12,000 performances per year in Karnataka generating a turnover of Rs. Six crore. ",
  "Hanaya Yohei (華屋 与兵衛 or 花屋 與兵衛; 1799–1858) was a Japanese restaurateur and chef who is generally credited as the inventor of Tokyo -style ( Edomaezushi ; 江戸前寿司) nigiri sushi at the end of the Edo period . He is also regarded as the inventor of modern sushi that is widely recognized around the world. \n\nHanaya was born in Reiganjima, Edo (present-day Shinkawa , Tokyo ). In 1810, he established a sushi restaurant, Hanaya, in Honjo , Edo (present-day Honjo, Tokyo). \n\nHanaya developed a new type of sushi, nigirizushi , which was different from the already existing oshizushi , in the early Bunsei era (1818-1830). \n\nSushi at his time was made from freshly captured fish from the nearby Tokyo Bay . This ruled out many of today's popular materials such as salmon roe ( ikura ; イクラ). Even though Tokyo is a coastal city, food safety was still a concern before the invention of refrigeration . To prevent spoilage, Hanaya either slightly cooked or marinated the fish in soy sauce or vinegar . It was quite reasonable for people to dislike the fatty belly meat of tuna because it would decompose very quickly. Hanaya marinated the lean red meat in soy sauce. Then he served the sliced fish on vinegared rice balls that are large by today's standard. His sushi was totally different from today's \"raw fish\" stereotype. [ citation needed ]\n\nHanaya died at the age of 59 in 1858. \n\nHanaya's cookery was a departure from Japanese eating habits of the time. In the early years, a chef only made sushi part-time. Then, slowly, inexpensive sushi stands ( yatai ; 屋台) emerged. After the government outlawed these questionable food stands, sushi restaurants ( ryōtei; 料亭) became mainstream. [ citation needed ]",
  "Carlo Gregorio Verdone (born 17 November 1950) is an Italian actor, screenwriter and film director.\n\nVerdone is best known for his comedic roles in Italian classics, which he also wrote and directed. His career was jumpstarted by his first three successes, Fun Is Beautiful (1980), Bianco, rosso e Verdone (1981) and Talcum Powder (1982). Since the 1990s, he has been introducing more serious subjects in his work, linked to the excesses of society and the individual's hardships in confronting it; some examples are Damned the Day I Met You (1992), My Best Enemy (2006) and Me, Them and Lara (2010).\n\nCarlo Verdone was born in Rome to Mario Verdone, an important Italian film critic and academic, and studied at the Italian Liceo classico in Rome, having the future actor Christian De Sica as his deskmate. Subsequently, Verdone earned a degree in Modern Literature at Sapienza University of Rome , the same university where his father taught, and a degree in Film Direction at the Centro Sperimentale di Cinematografia . During the 1970s he started a television career highlighting his varied comic style, acting as well in some ads in the Carosello show and he started to introduce his characters on television in 1978 in the popular comedy series \"Non Stop\". \n\nVerdone made his debut as a director in 1980 with the movie Fun Is Beautiful , in which he played three different characters. He used the same formula of the first work in 1981, when he directed Bianco, rosso e Verdone , a movie about three different men during election day in Italy. The movie, produced by his mentor Sergio Leone , was very successful in Italy and had a soundtrack composed by Ennio Morricone . \n\nHe and Alberto Sordi wrote two Verdone films together: Journey with Papà , directed by Sordi, and Troppo forte , directed by Verdone and co-written as well by Sergio Leone . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1999 he wrote the book \"Fatti Coatti\". In 2005 he took part in the Italian blockbuster romantic comedy named Manual of Love , and in the sequels named Manual of Love 2 (2007) and The Ages of Love (2011), both directed by Giovanni Veronesi , while in 2013 he starred in Paolo Sorrentino 's The Great Beauty . In 2018 he directed Blessed Madness , which he co-wrote with Nicola Guaglianone and the cartoonist and screenwriter Menotti . \n\nHe has two siblings: Luca, a film director, and Silvia, a film producer and wife of the actor Christian De Sica .",
  "Breakdancing or breaking , also called b-boying (when performed by men) or b-girling (women), is a style of street dance originated by African Americans and Puerto Ricans in the Bronx borough of New York City. \n\nBreakdancing consists mainly of four kinds of movement— toprock , downrock , power moves , and freezes —and is typically set to songs containing drum breaks , especially in funk , soul , and hip-hop . Its modern dance elements originated among the poor youth of New York during the early 1980s. It is tied to the birth of hip-hop, whose DJs developed rhythmic break for dancers. \n\nThe dance form has expanded globally, with an array of organizations and independent competitions supporting its growth. Breaking became an Olympic sport at the 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris , as per a December 7, 2020 decision by the International Olympic Committee , after a proposal by the World DanceSport Federation . \n\nThe origin of the term breakdance is unknown. It was used by hiphop pioneer and breakdancer Kurtis Blow in a 1980 profile by Bill Adler in the New York Daily News . The term is frequently used to refer to the dance in popular culture and in the mainstream entertainment industry. The term break has been used in music, particularly jazz music since the 1920s, in which a solo musician is given a break in which to play solo for a time. The term breakdancing has become an umbrella term that includes California-based dance styles such as popping , locking , and electric boogaloo , in addition to the New York-based b-boying. : 60 \n\nA practitioner of this dance is called a b-boy , b-girl , breakdancer , or breaker . The terms b-boy ( ' break-boy ' ), b-girl ( ' break-girl ' ), and breaker were the original terms used to describe the dancers who performed to DJ Kool Herc 's breakbeats. The obvious connection of the term breaking is to the word breakbeat . [ citation needed ] DJ Kool Herc has said that the term breaking was 1970s slang for ' getting excited ' , ' acting energetically ' or ' causing a disturbance ' . \n\nMost pioneers and notable practitioners prefer the older terms b-boying and breaking . Frosty Freeze of the Rock Steady Crew has said, \"We were known as b-boys\"; hip-hop pioneer Afrika Bambaataa has said, \"B-boys, [are] what you call break boys...or b-girls, what you call break girls.\" Co-founder of Rock Steady Crew Santiago \"Jo Jo\" Torres, Rock Steady Crew member Marc \"Mr. Freeze\" Lemberger, hip-hop historian Fab 5 Freddy , and rappers Big Daddy Kane and Tech N9ne use the term b-boy . \n\nSome enthusiasts consider breakdancing an ignorant, and even pejorative, term. Others use it to derogatorily refer to studio -trained dancers who can perform the moves but who do not live a \"b-boy lifestyle\". : 61 Still others use the term breakdancer to disparage those who learn the dance for personal gain rather than for commitment to the culture. : 61 Many accuse the media of presenting a simplified version of the dance that focuses on \"tricks\" instead of culture. \n\nAccording to dance researcher Harri Heinilä, “It has been clear that the 'Breakdance' and other Hip Hop-related dances at the very least resemble or even were inherited from earlier African American dances, which have been collectively called jazz dance since this term appeared by 1917 and was established by the end of the 1920s.\" For example, in 1942, ‘The Mills Brothers' short film The Caravan featured a dance sequence that bears a striking resemblance to modern breakdancing. The dancer entered the center of a circle formed by spectators, starting with movements similar to the Charleston, echoing the style of Toprocking/Uprocking. He then executed a backflip, dropped face down to the ground, and transitioned into spins, rotating his body horizontally with the support of his hands and feet. Afterward, he stood up, spun, and performed an Eagle Rock-like jazz dance before exiting the circle. \n\nMany elements of breaking developed before the 1970s. Even Colonial American dances such as the minuet , Juba , the quadrille , and the waltz may have contributed elements. The Juba, for example, is an African dance where men had dance circles where one man at a time would go and dance, similar to modern-day breaking. This dance also inspired competition, also seen in breaking, because better treatment would be given to the slave who intrigued their master. In the 1877 book Rob Roy on the Baltic , John MacGregor describes seeing near Norrköping a \"young man quite alone, who was practicing over and over the most inexplicable leap in the air...he swung himself up, and then round on his hand for a point, when his upper leg described a great circle.\" The engraving shows a young man apparently breaking. The dance was called the Giesse Harad Polska or \"salmon district dance\". In 1894, Thomas Edison filmed Walter Wilkins, Denny Toliver, and Joe Rastus dancing and performing a \"breakdown\". Then in 1898 he filmed a young street dancer performing acrobatic headspins. Some authors claim that breaking and capoeira have common African origin, while others claim that capoeira directly influenced breaking. There is also evidence of a similar style of dancing in Kaduna, Nigeria, in 1959. B-boy pioneers Richard \"Crazy Legs\" Colon and Kenneth \"Ken Swift\" Gabbert, both of Rock Steady Crew, cite James Brown and Kung Fu films (notably Bruce Lee films) as influences. Many of the acrobatic moves, such as the flare , show clear connections to gymnastics.\n\nHowever, it was not until the 1970s that breaking developed as a defined dance style in the United States. These precursing elements began to take form in the early 1970s, as breaking began to grow at parties featuring DJs and instrumental records. It was at these parties that DJ Kool Herc , a Bronx-based DJ pioneer, developed rhythmic breakdown sections by simultaneously switching between two copies of the same record, creating \" breaks \". By looping the records and their simultaneous breaks, he was able to prolong the break and provide a rhythmic and improvisational base for dancers: Herc tells Jeff Chang in his book Can't Stop Won't Stop (2005), \"And once they heard that, that was it, wasn't no turning back. They always wanted to hear breaks after breaks after breaks after breaks.\" \n\nDance researcher Serouj Aprahamian argued that African-Americans \"almost exclusively birthed and cultivated the dance during its formative years,\" while others, such as Anna Beatrice Scott, argued that Nuyoricans were part of breakdancing from its origins in the 1970s. \n\nBreaking prompted dance battles and dance sessions known as \"cyphers\", competitive circles in which participants took turns dancing while surrounded by onlookers. The Five-Percent Nation first used the term \"cypher\" to denote circles of people. Crews including the Rock Steady Crew or Mighty Zulu Kingz began to form, in response to the growth of competitive cyphers which sometimes featured cash-prizes, titles, and bragging rights. \n\nBreaking started as toprock , footwork-oriented dance moves performed standing up, but as dance crews began to experiment, a separate dance form known as uprock further influenced breaking. Uprock , also known as Brooklyn uprock, is a more aggressive dance style commonly performed between two partners that feature intricate footwork and hitting motions, mimicking a fight. As a separate dance style, it never gained the same widespread popularity as breaking, except for some very specific moves adopted by breakers who use it as a variation for their toprock. Uprock is also stated to have roots in gangs, as an expressive medium used to settle turf disputes, with the winner deciding the location of a future battle. Although some disagree that breaking ever played a part in mediating gang rivalry, the early growth of breaking still primarily served to assist the poor youth of the Bronx to stray away from gang violence and rather expel their time towards an artistic dance. One example is former gang leader Afrika Bambaataa , who hosted hip-hop parties and vowed to specifically use hip-hop to support children away from gang violence. He would eventually form the Universal Zulu Nation to further his message. \n\nSome breakers argue that because uprock was originally a separate dance style it should never be mixed with breaking and that the uprock moves performed by breakers today are not the original moves but imitations that only show a small part of the original uprock style. In the music video for 1985's hit single \" I Wonder If I Take You Home \", Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam 's drummer Mike Hughes can be seen \"rocking\" (doing uprock) at 1:24 when viewed on YouTube .\n\nBy the early 1990s, \"Australia was a world leading power move country\", according to 2020s award-winning breaker Kid Tek. Stars of the time included B-Boy All Stars from Brisbane , who appeared on the American talent show Star Search in 1992. During the 2000s, the style evolved from focussing on power moves back to foundational styles. Influential Bronx breaker Alien Ness visited Melbourne to judge a competition, who influenced local breakers to adopt this shift in style. Notable crews of that time were Fresh Sox from Melbourne and SKB (aka Street Kulture Breakerz), from Western Sydney , who recruited Korean breakers B-Boy Blond and B-Boy Blue. SKB were continuing to compete as of 2023. \n\nThe breaking scene was peaking around 2010, but dipped between 2013 and 2017. After it was announced that breakdancing was going to be included as a sport in the 2024 Olympics , its popularity surged again. Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020–21, because of social distancing measures, breakers started doing battle online, via Zoom or Instagram. Australian breakers started developing more creative and innovative styles, and \"pushing international barriers\", according to Kid Tek. The qualifying Australian entrants to the Olympics were b-girl Raygun (36-year-old university lecturer Rachael Gunn ), and 16-year-old b-boy Jeff \"J Attack\" Dunne. Neither made it out of the round-robin stage, and Raygun was widely mocked online for her creative \"kangaroo hop\" moves, with a video clip of her performance going viral, as well as discussed in the press. Both entrants chose to wear their team tracksuit rather than street clothes. \n\nIsmael Toledo was one of the first breakers in Brazil. In 1984, he moved to the United States to study dance. While in the U.S. he discovered breakdancing and ended up meeting breaker Crazy Legs who personally mentored him for the four years that followed. After becoming proficient in breakdancing, he moved back to São Paulo and started to organize crews and enter international competitions. He eventually opened a hip-hop dance studio called the Hip-Hop Street College. \n\nBorn in Thailand and raised in the United States, Tuy \"KK\" Sobil started a community center called Tiny Toones in Phnom Penh , Cambodia in 2005 where he uses dancing, hip-hop music, and art to teach Cambodian youth language skills, computer skills, and life skills (hygiene, sex education, counseling). His organization helps roughly 5,000 youths each year. One of these youths include Diamond, who is regarded as Cambodia's first b-girl. \n\nThere are several ways breakdancing came to Canada. During the late 1970s and early 1980s, films such as Breakin ' (1984) , Beat Street (1984), and the immigration of people from Chicago , New York , Detroit , Seattle , and Los Angeles introduced dance styles from the United States. Breakdancing expanded in Canada from there, with crews like Canadian Floormasters taking over the 80's scene, and New Energy opening for James Brown in 1984 at the Paladium in Montreal. Leading into the 90's, crews like Bag of Trix, Rakunz, Intrikit, Contents Under Pressure, Supernaturalz, Boogie Brats, and Red Power Squad, led the scene throughout the rest of the past two decades and counting.\n\nIn the 2024 Paris Olympics men's gold medal showdown, Canada's Philip \"Phil Wizard\" Kim swept 3 rounds against France's Danis \"Danny Dan\" Civil with judges voting 23–4. \n\nAlthough social media such as YouTube cannot be used in China, breakdancing in China has been popular. Many people copy breakdancing videos from abroad and distribute them back to the mainland. Although it is still an underground culture in China because of some restrictions, breakdancing was reported to be a growing presence in 2013. \n\nBreakdancing took off in France in the early 1980s with the creation of groups such as the Paris City Breakers (who styled themselves after the well-known New York City Breakers ). In 1984, France became the first country in the world to have a regularly and nationally broadcast television show about Hip Hop—hosted by Sidney Duteil —with a focus on Hip Hop dance. This show led to the explosion of Hip Hop dance in France, with many new crews appearing on the scene. \n\nBreakdancing in Japan was introduced in 1983 following the release of the movie Wild Style . The release of the movie was accompanied by a tour by the Rock Steady Crew and many Japanese were captivated. Other movies such as Flashdance followed and furthered the breakdance craze. Crazy-A, the leader of the Tokyo chapter of the Rock Steady Crew, was dragged to see Flashdance by his then girlfriend and walked out captivated by the dance form and became one its earliest and one of the most influential breakers in Japanese history. Groups began to spring up as well, with early groups such as Tokyo B-Boys, Dynamic Rock Force (American kids from Yokota AB), B-5 Crew, and Mystic Movers popping up in Harajuku . The breakdancing community in Japan found a home in Tokyo's Yoyogi Park in Harajuku, which still remains an active area for breakdancers and hip-hop enthusiasts. As hip-hop continued to grow in Japan, so did breakdancing and the breakdancing communities. Following the introduction of international breakdancing competitions, Japan began to compete and were praised for their agility and precision, yet they were criticized in the beginning for lacking originality. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Japanese began to truly flourish on the international stage following the breakdancing career of Taisuke Nonaka, known simply as Taisuke. Taisuke began to dominate the international scene and led the Japanese team Floorriorz to win the BOTY in 2015 against crew Kienjuice from Belarus. Despite Taisuke's successful career in group competitions, he failed to win the solo Red Bull BC One competition, an individual breakdancing championship that had continued to evade Japanese bboys. The first Japanese to win the BC One competition became Bboy Issei in 2016. Issei is widely regarded by many as the best Japanese breakdancer currently and in the eyes of some, the best worldwide. Female bboys, or \"bgirls\", are also prevalent in Japan and following the introduction of a female BC One competition in 2018, Japanese bgirl Ami Yuasa became the first female champion. Notable Japanese bboy crews include FoundNation, Body Carnival, and the Floorriorz. Notable Japanese bgirl crews include Queen of Queens, Body Carnival, and Nishikasai. [ citation needed ]\n\nJapanese B-girl Ami won the first ever Olympic gold medal for breakdancing at the Paris 2024 Olympics . \n\nBreakdancing was first introduced to South Korea by American soldiers shortly after its surge of popularity in the U.S. during the 1980s, but it was not until the late 1990s that the culture and dance took hold. 1997 is known as the \"Year Zero of Korean breaking\". A Korean-American hip hop promoter named John Jay Chon was visiting his family in Seoul and while he was there, he met a crew named Expression Crew in a club. He gave them a VHS tape of a Los Angeles breakdancing competition called Radiotron. A year later when he returned, Chon found that his video and others like his had been copied and dubbed numerous times, and were feeding an ever-growing breaker community.\n\nIn 2002, Korea's Expression Crew won the prestigious international breakdancing competition Battle of the Year , exposing the skill of the country's breakers to the rest of the world. Since then, the Korean government has capitalized on the popularity of the dance and has promoted it alongside Korean culture. R-16 Korea is the most well-known government-sponsored breakdancing event, and is hosted by the Korea Tourism Organization and supported by the Ministry of Culture, Sports, and Tourism.\n\nFamous breakdancing crews from Korea include Morning of Owl, Jinjo Crew , Rivers Crew and Gamblerz .\n\nIn the 1980s the Soviet Union was in a state of the Cold War with the countries of the Western Bloc . Soviet people lived behind the Iron Curtain , so they usually learned the new fashion trends emerging in the capitalist countries with some delay. The Soviet Union first learned of breakdancing in 1984, when videotapes of the films Breakin ' , Breakin' 2 and Beat Street got into the country. In the USSR these movies were not released officially. They were brought home by Soviet citizens who had the opportunity to travel to Western countries (for example, by diplomats). Originally, the dance became popular in big cities: Moscow and Leningrad , as well as in the Baltic republics (some citizens of these Soviet republics had the opportunity to watch Western television). The attitude of the authorities to the new dance that came from the West was negative. \n\nThe situation changed in 1985 with Mikhail Gorbachev who came to power and with the beginning of the Perestroika policy. The first to legalize the new dance were dancers from the Baltic republics. They presented this dance as the \"protest against the arbitrariness of the capitalists\", explaining that the dance was invented by Black Americans from poor neighborhoods. In 1985 the performance of Czech Jiří Korn was shown in the program \"Morning Post\", and became one of the first official demonstrations of breakdancing on Soviet television. With the support of the Leninist Young Communist League in 1986 breakdance festivals were held in the cities of the Baltic republics ( Tallinn , Palanga , Riga ). The next step was the spreading of the similar festivals to other Soviet republics. Festivals were held in Donetsk (Ukraine), Vitebsk (Belarus), Gorky (Russia). Breakdancing could be seen in Soviet cinema: Dancing on the Roof (1985), Courier (1986), Publication (1988). By the end of the decade the dance became almost ubiquitous. At almost any disco or school dance one could see a person dancing in the \"robot\" style. \n\nIn the early 1990s, the country experienced a severe economic and political crisis. With the dissolution of the Soviet Union , the breakdance craze was over and breakdancing became dated. The next wave of interest in breakdancing in Russia would only occur in the late 90s. \n\nThere are four primary elements that form breakdancing: toprock, downrock, power moves, and freezes.\n\n… because everybody watches the same videos online, everybody ends up looking very similar. The differences between individual b-boys, between crews, between cities/states/countries/continents, have largely disappeared. It used to be that you could tell what city a b-boy was from by the way he danced. Not anymore. But I've been saying these things for almost a decade, and most people don't listen, but continue watching the same videos and dancing the same way. It's what I call the \"international style\", or the \"Youtube style\". \n\nLuis \"Alien Ness\" Martinez, the president of Mighty Zulu Kings, expressed a similar frustration in a separate interview three years earlier with \"The Super B-Beat Show\" about the top five things he hates in breakdancing:\n\nOh yeah, the last thing I hate in breakin'… Yo, all y'all motherfuckin' internet b-boys... I'm an internet b-boy too, but I'm real about my shit. Everybody knows who I am, I'm out at every fucking jam, I'm in a different country every week. I tell my story dancing... I've been all around the world, y'all been all around the world wide web... [my friend] Bebe once said that shit, and I co-sign that, Bebe said that. That wasn't me but that's the realist shit I ever heard anybody say. I've been all around the world, you've been all around the world wide web. \n\nAlthough there are some generalities in the styles that exist, many dancers combine elements of different styles with their own ideas and knowledge in order to create a unique style of their own. Breakers can therefore be categorized into a broad style, which generally showcases the same types of techniques.\n\nThe musical selection for breakdancing is not restricted to hip-hop music as long as the tempo and beat pattern conditions are met. Breakdancing can be readily adapted to different music genres with the aid of remixing . The original songs that popularized the dance form borrow significantly from progressive genres of funk , soul , disco , electro , and jazz funk . A musical canon of these traditional b-boy songs have since developed, songs that were once expected to be played at every b-boying event. As the dance form grew, this standardization of classic songs prompted innovation of dance moves and break beats that reimagined the standard melodies. These songs include \"Give It Up or Turn It a Loose\" by James Brown, \"Apache\" by the Incredible Bongo Band, and \"The Mexican\" by Babe Ruth to name a few. \n\nThe most common feature of breakdance music exists in musical breaks , or compilations formed from samples taken from different songs which are then looped and chained together by the DJ. The tempo generally ranges between 110 and 135 beats per minute with shuffled sixteenth and quarter beats in the percussive pattern. History credits DJ Kool Herc for the invention of this concept later termed the break beat .\n\nSimilar to other hip-hop subcultures, such as graffiti writing, rapping , and DJing , breakers are predominantly male, but this is not to say that women breakers, b-girls, are invisible or nonexistent. Female participants, such as Daisy Castro (also known as Baby Love of Rock Steady Crew), attest that females have been breakdancing since its inception. Critics argue that it is unfair to make a sweeping generalization about these inequalities because women have begun to play a larger role in the breakdancing scene. \n\nSome people have pointed to a lack of promotion as a barrier, as full-time b-girl Firefly stated in a BBC piece: \"It's getting more popular. There are a lot more girls involved. The problem is that promoters are not putting on enough female-only battles.\" Growing interest is being shown in changing the traditional image of females in hip-hop culture (and by extension, breakdance culture) to a more positive, empowered role in the modern hip-hop scene. \n\nIn 2018, Japan's B-Girl Ami became the first B-Girl world champion of Red Bull BC One. Although B-Girl Ayumi had been invited as a competitor for the 2017 championship, it was only until 2018 that a 16 B-Girl bracket was featured as part of the main event.\n\nIn the past 50 years, various films have depicted the dance. 1975's (filmed in 1974) Tommy included a breakdancing sequence during the \"Sensation\" number. Later, in the early 1980s, several films depicted breakdancing including Fame , Wild Style , Flashdance , Breakin' , Breakin' 2: Electric Boogaloo , Delivery Boys , Krush Groove , and Beat Street . In 1985, at the height of breakdancing's popularity, Donnie Yen starred in a Hong Kong film called Mismatched Couples in which he performed various b-boy and breakdancing moves.\n\nThe 2000s saw a resurgence of films and television series featuring breakdancing that continued into the early 2010s:\n\nSeveral documentary films have been made about breakdancing:\n\nIn the United States, Breakdancing is widely referred to in TV advertising, as well as news, travelogue, and documentary segments, as an indicator of youth/street culture. From a production point of view the style is visually arresting, instantly recognizable, and adducible to fast-editing, while the ethos is multi ethnic, energetic, and edgy, but free from the gangster-laden overtones of much rap-culture imagery. Its usability as a visual cliché benefits sponsorship, despite the relatively small following of the genre itself beyond the circle of its practitioners. In 2005, a Volkswagen Golf GTi commercial featured a partly CGI version of Gene Kelly popping and breakdancing to a remix of \" Singin' in the Rain \" by Mint Royale . The tagline was, \"The original, updated.\" The dance shows So You Think You Can Dance and America's Best Dance Crew arguably brought breakdancing back to the forefront of pop culture in the United States, similar to the popularity it had enjoyed in the 1980s. The American drama television series Step Up: High Water , a series focused on breakdancing and other forms of hip-hop dance, premiered on March 20, 2019.\n\nSince breakdancing's popularity surge in South Korea, it has been featured in various TV dramas and commercials. Break is a 2006 South Korean miniseries about a breakdancing competition. Over the Rainbow is a 2006 South Korean drama series centered on different characters who are brought together by breakdancing. Showdown , a breakdancing competition game show hosted by Jay Park , premiered in South Korea on March 18, 2022. \n\nA few video games feature breaking, including:",
  "Humans and other hominids have consumed eggs for millions of years. The most widely consumed eggs are those of fowl , especially chickens . People in Southeast Asia began harvesting chicken eggs for food by 1500 BCE. Eggs of other birds , such as ducks and ostriches , are eaten regularly but much less commonly than those of chickens. People may also eat the eggs of reptiles , amphibians , and fish . Fish eggs consumed as food are known as roe or caviar .\n\nHens and other egg-laying creatures are raised throughout the world, and mass production of chicken eggs is a global industry. In 2009, an estimated 62.1 million metric tons of eggs were produced worldwide from a total laying flock of approximately 6.4 billion hens. There are issues of regional variation in demand and expectation, as well as current debates concerning methods of mass production. In 2012, the European Union banned battery husbandry of chickens.\n\nBird eggs have been valuable foodstuffs since prehistory , in both hunting societies and more recent cultures where birds were domesticated. The chicken was most likely domesticated for its eggs (from jungle fowl native to tropical and subtropical Southeast Asia and Indian subcontinent ) before 7500 BCE . Chickens were brought to Sumer and Egypt by 1500 BCE, and arrived in Greece around 800 BCE, where the quail had been the primary source of eggs. In Thebes, Egypt , the tomb of Haremhab, dating to approximately 1420 BCE, shows a depiction of a man carrying bowls of ostrich eggs and other large eggs, presumably those of the pelican , as offerings. In ancient Rome , eggs were preserved using a number of methods and meals often started with an egg course. The Romans crushed the shells in their plates to prevent evil spirits from hiding there. \n\nIn the Middle Ages , eggs were forbidden during Lent because of their richness, although the motivation for forgoing eggs during Lent was not entirely religious. An annual pause in egg consumption allowed farmers to rest their flocks, and also to limit their hens' consumption of feed during a time of year when food stocks were usually scarce.\n\nEggs scrambled with acidic fruit juices were popular in France in the seventeenth century; this may have been the origin of lemon curd . \n\nThe dried egg industry developed in the nineteenth century, before the rise of the frozen egg industry. In 1878, a company in St. Louis, Missouri started to transform egg yolk and egg white into a light-brown, meal-like substance by using a drying process. The production of dried eggs significantly expanded during World War II , for use by the United States Armed Forces and its allies. \n\nIn 1911, the egg carton was invented by Joseph Coyle in Smithers, British Columbia , to solve a dispute about broken eggs between a farmer in Bulkley Valley and the owner of the Aldermere Hotel. Early egg cartons were made of paper. Polystyrene egg cartons became popular in the latter half of the twentieth century as they were perceived to offer better protection especially against heat and breakage, however, by the twenty-first century environmental considerations have led to the return of more biodegradable paper cartons (often made of recycled material) that once again became more widely used.\n\nWhereas the wild Asian fowl from which domesticated chickens are descended typically lay about a dozen eggs each year during the breeding season, several millennia of selective breeding have produced domesticated hens capable of laying more than three hundred eggs each annually, and to lay eggs year round.\n\nBird eggs are a common food and one of the most versatile ingredients used in cooking. They are important in many branches of the modern food industry . \n\nThe most commonly used bird eggs are those from the chicken , duck , and goose . Smaller eggs, such as quail eggs , are used occasionally as a gourmet ingredient in Western countries. Eggs are a common everyday food in many parts of Asia, such as China and Thailand , with Asian production providing 59 percent of the world total in 2013. \n\nThe largest bird eggs, from ostriches , tend to be used only as special luxury food. Gull eggs are considered a delicacy in England , as well as in some Scandinavian countries, particularly in Norway . In some African countries, guineafowl eggs often are seen in marketplaces, especially in the spring of each year. Pheasant eggs and emu eggs are edible, but less widely available; sometimes they are obtainable from farmers, poulterers , or luxury grocery stores. In many countries, wild bird eggs are protected by laws which prohibit the collecting or selling of them, or permit collection only during specific periods of the year. \n\nIn 2017, world production of chicken eggs was 80.1 million tonnes . The largest producers were China with 31.3 million of this total, the United States with 6.3 million, India at 4.8 million, Mexico at 2.8 million, Japan at 2.6 million, and Brazil and Russia with 2.5 million each. The largest egg factory in British Columbia, for example, ships 12 million eggs per week. \n\nFor the month of January 2019, the United States produced 9.41 billion eggs, with 8.2 billion for table consumption and 1.2 billion for raising chicks. Americans are projected to each consume 279 eggs in 2019, the highest since 1973, but less than the 405 eggs eaten per person in 1945. \n\nDuring production, eggs can be candled to check their quality. The size of an egg's air cell is determined, and if fertilization took place three to six days or earlier prior to the candling, blood vessels can typically be seen as evidence that the egg contains an embryo. Contrary to common misconception , this is not conclusive evidence of fertilization, as blood vessels can just denote an ordinary rupture on the egg yolk surface while the egg was forming. Depending on local regulations, eggs may be washed before being placed in egg boxes , although washing may shorten their length of freshness.\n\nBird and reptile eggs consist of a protective eggshell , albumen ( egg white ), and vitellus ( egg yolk ), contained within various thin membranes . The egg yolk is suspended in the egg white by one or two spiral bands of tissue called the chalazae (from the Greek word χάλαζα , meaning 'hailstone' or 'hard lump'). The shape of a chicken egg resembles a prolate spheroid with one end larger than the other and has cylindrical symmetry along the long axis.\n\nThe larger end of the egg contains an air cell that forms when the contents of the egg cool down and contract after it is laid. Chicken eggs are graded according to the size of this air cell, measured during candling . A very fresh egg has a small air cell and receives a grade of AA. As the size of the air cell increases and the quality of the egg decreases, the grade moves from AA to A to B. This provides a way of testing the age of an egg: as the air cell increases in size due to air being drawn through pores in the shell as water is lost, the egg becomes less dense and the larger end of the egg will rise to increasingly shallower depths when the egg is placed in a bowl of water. A very old egg will float in the water and should not be eaten, especially if a foul odor can be detected if the egg is cracked open. \n\nEggshell color is caused by pigment deposition during egg formation in the oviduct and may vary according to species and breed , from the more common white or brown to pink or speckled blue-green. The brown pigment is protoporphyrin IX , a precursor of heme , and the blue pigment is biliverdin , a product of the breakdown of heme. Generally, chicken breeds with white ear lobes lay white eggs, whereas chickens with red ear lobes lay brown eggs. Although there is no significant link between shell color and nutritional value, often there is a cultural preference for one color over another (see § Color of eggshell below). As candling is less effective with brown eggs, they have a significantly higher incidence of blood spots. \n\nThe eggshell membrane is a clear film lining the eggshell, visible when one peels a boiled egg. Primarily, it is composed of fibrous proteins such as collagen type I . These membranes may be used commercially as a dietary supplement.\n\n\"White\" is the common name for the clear liquid (also called the albumen or the glair/glaire) contained within an egg. Colorless and transparent initially, upon cooking it turns white and opaque. In chickens, it is formed from the layers of secretions of the anterior section of the hen oviduct during the passage of the egg. It forms around both fertilized and unfertilized yolks. The primary natural purpose of egg white is to protect the yolk and provide additional nutrition during the growth of the embryo .\n\nEgg white consists primarily of approximately 90 percent water into which is dissolved 10 percent proteins (including albumins , mucoproteins , and globulins ). Unlike the yolk, which is high in lipids (fats), egg white contains almost no fat and the carbohydrate content is less than one percent. Egg white has many uses in food and many other applications, including the preparation of vaccines , such as those for influenza . \n\nThe yolk in a newly laid egg is round and firm. As the yolk ages, it absorbs water from the albumen, which increases its size and causes it to stretch and weaken the vitelline membrane (the clear casing enclosing the yolk). The resulting effect is a flattened and enlarged yolk shape.\n\nYolk color is dependent on the diet of the hen. If the diet contains yellow or orange plant pigments known as xanthophylls , then they are deposited in the yolk, coloring it. Lutein is the most abundant pigment in egg yolk. A diet without such colorful foods may result in an almost colorless yolk. Yolk color is, for example, enhanced if the diet includes foods such as yellow corn and marigold petals. In the US, the use of artificial color additives is forbidden. \n\nAbnormalities that have been found in eggs purchased for human consumption include:\n\nChicken eggs are widely used in many types of dish, both sweet and savory, including many baked goods . Some of the most common preparation methods include scrambled , fried , poached , hard-boiled , soft-boiled, omelettes , and pickled . They also may be eaten raw, although this is not recommended for people who may be especially susceptible to salmonellosis , such as the elderly, the infirm, or pregnant women. In addition, the protein in raw eggs is only 51 percent bioavailable , whereas that of a cooked egg is nearer 91 percent bioavailable, meaning the protein of cooked eggs is nearly twice as absorbable as the protein from raw eggs. \n\nAs a cooking ingredient, egg yolks are an important emulsifier in the kitchen, and are also used as a thickener, as in custards .\n\nThe albumen (egg white) contains protein, but little or no fat , and may be used in cooking separately from the yolk. The proteins in egg white allow it to form foams and aerated dishes. Egg whites may be aerated or whipped to a light, fluffy consistency, and often are used in desserts such as meringues and mousse .\n\nGround eggshells sometimes are used as a food additive to deliver calcium . Every part of an egg is edible, although the eggshell is generally discarded. Some recipes call for immature or unlaid eggs, which are harvested after the hen is slaughtered or cooked, while still inside the chicken. \n\nEggs contain multiple proteins that gel at different temperatures within the yolk and the white, and the temperature determines the gelling time. Egg yolk becomes a gel , or solidifies, between 61 and 70 °C (142 and 158 °F). Egg white gels at different temperatures: 60 to 73 °C (140 to 163 °F). The white contains exterior albumen which sets at the highest temperature. In practice, in many cooking processes the white gels first because it is exposed to higher temperatures for longer. \n\nSalmonella is killed instantly at 71 °C (160 °F), but also is killed from 54.5 °C (130.1 °F), if held at that temperature for sufficiently long time periods. To avoid the issue of salmonella, eggs may be pasteurized in-shell at 57 °C (135 °F) for an hour and 15 minutes. Although the white then is slightly milkier, the eggs may be used in normal ways. Whipping for meringue takes significantly longer, but the final volume is virtually the same. \n\nIf a boiled egg is overcooked, a greenish ring sometimes appears around the egg yolk due to changes to the iron and sulfur compounds in the egg. It also may occur with an abundance of iron in the cooking water. Overcooking harms the quality of the protein. Chilling an overcooked egg for a few minutes in cold water until it is completely cooled may prevent the greenish ring from forming on the surface of the yolk. \n\nPeeling a cooked egg is easiest when the egg was put into boiling water as opposed to slowly heating the egg from a start in cold water. \n\nIn February 2025, scientists published research confirming that periodic cooking of an egg is the best way to preserve the distinct textures of each part of an egg as well as its nutritional value. The method requires alternating between boiling and lukewarm water: two minutes in 100 °C (212 °F) water, two minutes at 30 °C (86 °F), repeated eight times. \n\nAlthough the age of the egg and the conditions of its storage have a greater influence, the bird's diet affects the flavor of the egg. For example, when a brown-egg chicken breed eats rapeseed (canola) or soy meals, its intestinal microbes metabolize them into fishy-smelling triethylamine , which ends up in the egg. The unpredictable diet of free-range hens will produce likewise, unpredictable egg flavors. Duck eggs tend to have a flavor distinct from, but still resembling, chicken eggs.\n\nEggs may be soaked in mixtures to absorb flavor. Tea eggs , a common snack sold from street-side carts in China, are steeped in a brew from a mixture of various spices, soy sauce, and black tea leaves to give flavor. Hard boiled eggs are cracked slightly before being simmered in the marinade for more flavor, also giving them their marble pattern. \n\nCareful storage of edible eggs is extremely important, as an improperly handled egg may contain elevated levels of Salmonella bacteria that may cause severe food poisoning . In the US, eggs are washed. This cleans the shell, but erodes its cuticle . The USDA thus recommends refrigerating eggs to prevent the growth of Salmonella . \n\nRefrigeration also preserves the taste and texture. [ unreliable source? ] In Europe, eggs are not usually washed, and the shells are dirtier, however the cuticle is undamaged, and they do not require refrigeration. [ unreliable source? ] In the UK in particular, hens are immunized against salmonella and generally, their eggs are safe for 21 days. \n\nThe simplest method to preserve an egg is to treat it with salt . Salt draws water out of bacteria and molds , which prevents their growth. The Chinese salted duck egg is made by immersing duck eggs in brine , or coating them individually with a paste of salt and mud or clay . The eggs stop absorbing salt after approximately a month, having reached osmotic equilibrium . Their yolks take on an orange-red color and solidify, but the white remains somewhat liquid. These often are boiled before consumption and are served with rice congee ; the yolks are also used in mooncakes and other pastries.\n\nAnother method is to make pickled eggs , by boiling them first and immersing them in a mixture of vinegar , salt, and spices, such as ginger or allspice . Frequently, beetroot juice is added to impart a red color to the eggs. If the eggs are immersed in it for a few hours, the distinct red, white, and yellow colors may be seen when the eggs are sliced. If marinated for several days or more, the red color will reach the yolk. If the eggs are marinated in the mixture for several weeks or more, the vinegar will dissolve much of the shell's calcium carbonate and penetrate the egg, making it acidic enough to inhibit the growth of bacteria and molds. Pickled eggs made this way generally keep for a year or more without refrigeration. \n\nA century egg or hundred-year-old egg is preserved by coating an egg in a mixture of clay , wood ash , salt, lime , and rice straw for several weeks to several months, depending on the method of processing. After the process is completed, the yolk becomes a dark green, cream-like substance with a strong odor of sulfur and ammonia, while the white becomes a dark brown, transparent jelly with a comparatively mild, distinct flavor. The transforming agent in a century egg is its alkaline material, which gradually raises the pH of the egg from approximately 9 to 12 or more. This chemical process breaks down some of the complex, flavorless proteins and fats of the yolk into simpler, flavorful ones, which in some way may be thought of as an \"inorganic\" version of fermentation .\n\nEgg yolks and whole eggs store significant amounts of protein and choline . Due to their protein content, the United States Department of Agriculture formerly categorized eggs as Meat within the Food Guide Pyramid (now MyPlate ). \n\nA 50-gram (1.8 oz) medium/large chicken egg provides approximately 70 kilocalories (290 kJ) of food energy and 6 grams of protein . \n\nEggs (boiled) supply several vitamins and minerals as significant amounts of the Daily Value (DV), including (per 100g) vitamin A (19% DV), riboflavin (42% DV), pantothenic acid (28% DV), vitamin B 12 (46% DV), choline (60% DV), phosphorus (25% DV), zinc (11% DV) and vitamin D (15% DV). Cooking methods affect the nutritional values of eggs. [ clarify ]\n\nThe diet of laying hens also may affect the nutritional quality of eggs. For instance, chicken eggs that are especially high in omega-3 fatty acids are produced by feeding hens a diet containing polyunsaturated fats from sources such as fish oil , chia seeds , or flaxseeds . Pasture-raised free-range hens , which forage for their own food, also produce eggs that are relatively enriched in omega-3 fatty acids when compared to those of cage-raised chickens. \n\nA 2010 USDA study determined there were no significant differences of macronutrients in various chicken eggs. \n\nCooked eggs are easier to digest than raw eggs, as well as having a lower risk of salmonellosis . \n\nMore than half the calories found in eggs come from the fat in the yolk; 50 grams of chicken egg (the contents of an egg just large enough to be classified as \"large\" in the US, but \"medium\" in Europe) contains approximately five grams of fat. Saturated fat ( palmitic , stearic , and myristic acids ) makes up 27 percent of the fat in an egg. The egg white consists primarily of water (88 percent) and protein (11 percent), with no cholesterol and 0.2 percent fat. \n\nThere is debate over whether egg yolk presents a health risk. Some research suggests dietary cholesterol increases the ratio of total to HDL cholesterol and, therefore, adversely affects the body's cholesterol profile; whereas other studies show that moderate consumption of eggs, up to one a day, does not appear to increase heart disease risk in healthy individuals. Harold McGee argues that the cholesterol in the egg yolk is not what causes a problem, because fat (particularly saturated fat) is much more likely to raise cholesterol levels than the consumption of cholesterol. \n\nStudies have shown conflicting results about a possible connection between egg consumption and type 2 diabetes .\n\nA meta-analysis from 2013 found that eating four eggs per week was associated with a 29 percent increase in the relative risk of developing diabetes. Another meta-analysis from 2013 also supported the idea that egg consumption may lead to an increased incidence of type two diabetes. A 2016 meta-analysis suggested that association of egg consumption with increased risk of incident type 2 diabetes may be restricted to cohort studies from the United States . \n\nA 2020 meta-analysis found that there was no overall association between moderate egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes and that the risk found in US studies was not found in European or Asian studies. \n\nA 2015 meta-analysis found an association between higher egg consumption (five a week) with increased risk of breast cancer compared to no egg consumption. Another meta-analysis found that egg consumption may increase ovarian cancer risk. \n\nA 2019 meta-analysis found an association between high egg consumption and risk of upper aero-digestive tract cancers in hospital-based case-control studies. \n\nA 2021 review did not find a significant association between egg consumption and breast cancer. A 2021 umbrella review found that egg consumption significantly increases the risk of ovarian cancer. \n\nOne systematic review and meta-analysis of egg consumption found that higher consumption of eggs (more than 1 egg/day) was associated with a significant reduction in risk of coronary artery disease. Another systematic review and meta-analysis of dietary cholesterol and egg consumption found that egg consumption was associated with an increased all-cause mortality and CVD mortality. These contrary results may be due to somewhat different methods of study selection and the use primarily of observational studies , where confounding factors are not controlled. \n\nA 2018 meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials found that consumption of eggs increases total cholesterol (TC), LDL-C and HDL-C compared to no egg-consumption but not to low-egg control diets. In 2020, two meta-analyses found that moderate egg consumption (up to one egg a day) is not associated with an increased cardiovascular disease risk. A 2020 umbrella review concluded that increased egg consumption is not associated with cardiovascular disease risk in the general population. Another umbrella review found no association between egg consumption and cardiovascular disorders. \n\nA 2013 meta-analysis found no association between egg consumption and heart disease or stroke. A 2013 systematic review and meta-analysis found no association between egg consumption and cardiovascular disease or cardiovascular disease mortality, but did find egg consumption of more than once daily increased cardiovascular disease risk 1.69-fold in those with type 2 diabetes mellitus when compared to type 2 diabetics who ate less than one egg per week. Another 2013 meta-analysis found that eating four eggs per week increased the risk of cardiovascular disease by six percent. \n\nEggs are one of the largest sources of phosphatidylcholine ( lecithin ) in the human diet. A study published in the scientific journal, Nature , showed that dietary phosphatidylcholine is digested by bacteria in the gut and eventually converted into the compound TMAO , a compound linked with increased heart disease. Another study found that type 2 diabetes mellitus and kidney disease also increase TMAO levels and that evidence for a link between TMAO and cardiovascular diseases may be due to confounding or reverse causality. \n\nEgg consumption does not increase hypertension risk. A 2016 meta-analysis found that consumption of up to one egg a day may contribute to a decreased risk of total stroke . Two recent meta-analyses found no association between egg intake and risk of stroke. \n\nA 2019 meta-analysis revealed that egg consumption has no significant effect on serum biomarkers of inflammation . A 2021 review of clinical trials found that egg consumption has beneficial effects on macular pigment optical density and serum lutein. \n\nA health issue associated with eggs is contamination by pathogenic bacteria , such as Salmonella enteritidis . Contamination of eggs with other members of the genus Salmonella while exiting a female bird via the cloaca may occur, so care must be taken to prevent the egg shell from becoming contaminated with fecal matter. In commercial practice in the US, eggs are quickly washed with a sanitizing solution within minutes of being laid. The risk of infection from raw or undercooked eggs is dependent in part upon the sanitary conditions under which the hens are kept.\n\nHealth experts advise people to refrigerate washed eggs, use them within two weeks, cook them thoroughly, and never consume raw eggs. As with meat , containers and surfaces that have been used to process raw eggs should not come in contact with ready-to-eat food.\n\nA study by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in 2002 (Risk Analysis April 2002 22(2):203-18) suggests the problem is not so prevalent in the U.S. as once thought. It showed that of the 69 billion eggs produced annually, only 2.3 million are contaminated with Salmonella —equivalent to just one in every 30,000 eggs—thus showing Salmonella infection is quite rarely induced by eggs. This has not been the case in other countries, however, where Salmonella enteritidis and Salmonella typhimurium infections due to egg consumption are major concerns. Egg shells act as hermetic seals that guard against bacteria entering, but this seal can be broken through improper handling or if laid by unhealthy chickens. Most forms of contamination enter through such weaknesses in the shell. In the UK , the British Egg Industry Council awards the lions stamp to eggs that, among other things, come from hens that have been vaccinated against Salmonella . \n\nIn 2017, authorities blocked millions of eggs from sale in the Netherlands, Belgium, and Germany because of contamination with the insecticide fipronil . \n\nOne of the most common food allergies in infants is eggs. Infants usually have the opportunity to grow out of this allergy during childhood, if exposure is minimized. Allergic reactions against egg white are more common than reactions against egg yolks. In addition to true allergic reactions, some people experience a food intolerance to egg whites. Food labeling practices in most developed countries now include eggs, egg products, and the processing of foods on equipment that also process foods containing eggs in a special allergen alert section of the ingredients on the labels. \n\nMost commercially farmed chicken eggs intended for human consumption are unfertilized, since the laying hens are kept without roosters . Fertile eggs may be eaten, with little nutritional difference when compared to the unfertilized. Fertile eggs will not contain a developed embryo , as refrigeration temperatures inhibit cellular growth for an extended period of time. Sometimes an embryo is allowed to develop, but eaten before hatching as with balut .\n\nThe U.S. Department of Agriculture grades eggs by the interior quality of the egg (see Haugh unit ) and the appearance and condition of the egg shell. Eggs of any quality grade may differ in weight (size). Grade AA and Grade A eggs are best for frying and poaching, where appearance is important.\n\nIn Australia and the European Union , eggs are graded by the hen raising method, free range , battery caged , etc.\n\nChicken eggs are graded by size for the purpose of sales. Some maxi eggs may have double-yolks and some farms separate out double-yolk eggs for special sale. \n\nAlthough eggshell color is a largely cosmetic issue, with no effect on egg quality or taste, it is a major issue in production due to regional and national preferences for specific colors, and the results of such preferences on demand. For example, in most regions of the United States , chicken eggs generally are white. However, brown eggs are more common in some parts of the Northeastern United States , particularly New England , where a television jingle for years proclaimed \"brown eggs are local eggs, and local eggs are fresh!\". Local chicken breeds, including the Rhode Island Red , lay brown eggs. Brown eggs are preferred in China , Costa Rica , Ireland , France , and the United Kingdom . In Brazil and Poland , white chicken eggs are generally regarded as industrial, and brown or reddish ones are preferred. Small farms and smallholdings , particularly in economically advanced nations, may sell eggs of widely varying colors and sizes, with combinations of white, brown, speckled (red), green, and blue (as laid by certain breeds, including araucanas, heritage skyline, and cream leg bar) eggs in the same box or carton, while the supermarkets at the same time sell mostly eggs from the larger producers, of the color preferred in that nation or region.\n\nThese cultural trends have been observed for many years. The New York Times reported during the Second World War that housewives in Boston preferred brown eggs and those in New York preferred white eggs. In February 1976, the New Scientist magazine, in discussing issues of chicken egg color, stated \"Housewives are particularly fussy about the colour of their eggs, preferring even to pay more for brown eggs although white eggs are just as good\". As a result of these trends, brown eggs are usually more expensive to purchase in regions where white eggs are considered \"normal\", due to lower production. In France and the United Kingdom, it is very difficult to buy white eggs, with most supermarkets supplying only the more popular brown eggs. By contrast, in Egypt it is very hard to source brown eggs, as demand is almost entirely for white ones, with the country's largest supplier describing white eggs as \"table eggs\" and packaging brown eggs for export. \n\nResearch conducted by a French institute in the 1970s demonstrated blue chicken eggs from the Chilean araucana fowl may be stronger and more resilient to breakage. \n\nResearch at Nihon University , Japan, in 1990 revealed that when Japanese housewives were deciding which eggs to buy, color was a distinct factor, with most Japanese housewives preferring the white color. \n\nEgg producers carefully consider cultural issues, as well as commercial ones, when selecting the breed or breeds of chickens used for production, as egg color varies between breeds. Among producers and breeders, brown eggs often are referred to as \"tinted\", while the speckled eggs preferred by some consumers often are referred to as being \"red\" in color. \n\nCommercial factory farming operations often involve raising the hens in small, crowded cages, preventing the chickens from engaging in natural behaviors, such as wing-flapping, dust-bathing, scratching, pecking, perching, and nest-building. Such restrictions may lead to pacing and escape behavior . \n\nMany hens confined to battery cages, and some raised in cage-free conditions, are debeaked to prevent them from harming each other and engaging in cannibalism . According to critics of the practice, this can cause hens severe pain to the point where some may refuse to eat and starve to death. Some hens may be forced to molt to increase egg quality and production level after the molting . Molting can be induced by extended food withdrawal, water withdrawal, or controlled lighting programs.\n\nLaying hens often are euthanized when reaching 100 to 130 weeks of age, when their egg productivity starts to decline. Due to modern selective breeding , laying hen strains differ from meat production strains. As male birds of the laying strain do not lay eggs and are not suitable for meat production, they generally are killed soon after they hatch. \n\nFree-range eggs are considered by some advocates to be an acceptable substitute to factory-farmed eggs. Free-range laying hens are given outdoor access instead of being contained in crowded cages. Questions regarding the living conditions of free-range hens have been raised in the United States of America, as there is no legal definition or regulations for eggs labeled as free-range in that country. \n\nIn the United States, increased public concern for animal welfare has pushed various egg producers to promote eggs under a variety of standards. The most widespread standard in use is determined by United Egg Producers through their voluntary program of certification. The United Egg Producers program includes guidelines regarding housing, food, water, air, living space, beak trimming, molting, handling, and transportation, however, opponents such as The Humane Society have alleged UEP certification is misleading and allows a significant amount of unchecked animal cruelty. Other standards include \"Cage Free\", \"Natural\", \"Certified Humane\", and \" Certified Organic \". Of these standards, \"Certified Humane\", which carries requirements for stocking density and cage-free keeping and so on, and \"Certified Organic\", which requires hens to have outdoor access and to be fed only organic vegetarian feed and so on, are the most stringent. \n\nEffective 1 January 2012, the European Union banned conventional battery cages for egg-laying hens, as outlined in EU Directive 1999/74/EC. The EU permits the use of \"enriched\" furnished cages that must meet certain space and amenity requirements. Egg producers in many member states have objected to the new quality standards while in some countries, even furnished cages and family cages are subject to be banned as well. The production standard of the eggs is visible on a mandatory egg marking categorization where the EU egg code begins with 3 for caged chicken to 1 for free-range eggs and 0 for organic egg production.\n\nIn all methods of egg production, unwanted male chicks are killed at birth during the process of securing a further generation of egg-laying hens. As of June 2023, this practice has been banned in Germany, France, and Italy. Some egg producers have adopted in-ovo sexing , which first became available in 2018. As of September 2023, five companies have commercially available in-ovo sexing technology, which is used for 15 percent of the European layer population. \n\nA popular Easter tradition in some parts of the world is a decoration of hard-boiled eggs (usually by dyeing, but often by spray-painting). A similar tradition of egg painting exists in areas of the world influenced by the culture of Persia . Before the spring equinox in the Persian New Year tradition (called Norouz ), each family member decorates a hard-boiled egg and they set them together in a bowl. In Northern Europe and North America, Easter eggs may be hidden by adults for children to find in an Easter egg hunt . They may be rolled in some traditions. In Eastern and Central Europe, and parts of England, easter eggs may be tapped against each other to see whose egg breaks first. \n\nSince the sixteenth century, the tradition of a dancing egg is held during the feast of Corpus Christi in Barcelona and other Catalan cities. It consists of a hollow eggshell, positioned over the water jet from a fountain, which causes the eggshell to revolve without falling. \n\nIn China , egg food fraud in the form of fake chicken eggs made from resin, starch and pigments, for both domestic consumption and exports has been reported on several occasions. ",
  "Urania is a public educational institute and observatory in Vienna , Austria.\n\nUrania Observatory ( German : Urania Sternwarte ) was built in 1909 according to the plans of Art Nouveau style architect Max Fabiani (a student of Otto Wagner ) at the outlet of the Wien River and was opened in 1910 by Franz Joseph I of Austria as an educational facility with a public observatory . It was named after the Muse Urania who represents Astronomy .\n\nDuring World War II , the Urania was severely damaged and the dome with the observatory was destroyed. After its reconstruction, it was reopened in 1957. The observatory itself has been continually improved technically over the years.\n\nThough it now serves different functions, the Urania continues to be a public observatory. Presently the Urania also has seminar rooms in which wide-ranging classes and lectures are given, a movie theater that screens at the annual Viennale movie festival and a puppet theater created originally by actor Hans Kraus . The Urania moreover contains a memorial room for the Kindertransport organized by the Dutch resistance fighter and humanitarian Mrs Geertruida Wijsmuller-Meijer , who early December 1938 managed to rescue the first 600 Jewish children from Vienna after direct negotiations in Vienna with Adolf Eichmann . It also hosts a restaurant, and is the oldest public observatory in Austria. The highly awarded Austrian writer Carl Julius Haidvogel once worked there as an editor.\n\nThis Austrian school-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Computational philosophy or digital philosophy is the use of computational techniques in philosophy . It includes concepts such as computational models , algorithms , simulations , games, etc. that help in the research and teaching of philosophical concepts, as well as specialized online encyclopedias and graphical visualizations of relationships among philosophers and concepts. The use of computers in philosophy has gained momentum as computer power and the availability of data have increased greatly. This, along with the development of many new techniques that use those computers and data, has opened many new ways of doing philosophy that were not available before. It has also led to new insights in philosophy.\n\nThis philosophy -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Joann Sfar ( French: [ʒoan sfaʁ] ; born 28 August 1971) is a French comics artist , comic book creator , novelist , and film director .\n\nSfar was born in Nice , the son of Lilou , a pop singer, who died when he was three, and André Sfar, a lawyer well known for prosecuting Neo-Nazis . As a result of his mother's early death, Sfar was raised by his father and maternal grandfather, a military doctor of Ukrainian origin in the Alsace-Lorraine Independent Brigade (France) during World War II . Sfar's grandfather reportedly saved the right hand of the brigade's leader, novelist André Malraux , for which he was awarded French citizenship. \n\nSfar is considered one of the most important artists of the new wave of Franco-Belgian comics , though he has rejected the assertion that he, along with artists such as Christophe Blain , Marjane Satrapi , and Lewis Trondheim , sought to create an alternative scene or a new movement in comics. Many of his comics were published by L'Association which was founded in 1990 by Jean-Christophe Menu and six other artists. He also worked with many of the group's main artists, e.g. David B. and Lewis Trondheim. The Donjon series, which he created with Trondheim, has a cult following in many countries. \n\nSome of his comics are inspired by his Jewish heritage. Sfar is the son of Jewish parents (an Ashkenazi mother whose family was from Ukraine and a Sephardic father from Algeria ). He himself says that there is Ashkenazi humor in his Professeur Bell series (loosely based on Joseph Bell ), whereas Le chat du rabbin is clearly inspired by his Sephardic side. Les olives noires is a series about a Jewish child living in Israel at the time of Jesus . Like Le chat du rabbin , the series contains a lot of historical and theological information.\n\nHis main influences are Fred and André Franquin , as well as Marc Chagall , Chaïm Soutine , Will Eisner , Hugo Pratt and John Buscema . \n\nFrom 2009 to 2010, Sfar wrote and directed Gainsbourg: Vie Héroïque , a biopic of the illustrious French songwriter and singer, of whom Sfar is a self-confessed fanatic. The film, which draws substantially on Sfar's abilities as a comic book artist through its extensive use of fantasy artwork, animation and puppetry, was released in 2010 to general critical acclaim.\n\nSfar's book L’Eternel has been adapted for a live-action drama entitled Monsters’ Shrink by Canal plus . \n\nFootnotes",
  "The catch-all term adult comics typically denotes comic books , comic magazines, comic strips or graphic novels that are marketed either mainly or strictly towards adult (or mature) readers. This can be because they contain material that could be considered thematically inappropriate for children , including vulgarity, morally questionable actions, disturbing imagery, and sexually explicit material.\n\nAdult comics can be defined as intended for audience of 16 years or older. \n\nRoger Sabin traces the history of adult comics back to the political cartoons published in broadsheets since the 19th century. In the 1930s, there were clandestinely produced tijuana bibles – rectangular, eight page pamphlets with black printing on cheap white paper. The artwork ranged from excellent to utterly crude and the stories were explicit sexual escapades, usually featuring well known cartoon characters, political figures, or movie stars, without the subjects' consent. [ citation needed ]\n\nSold under the counter in places such as tobacco stores and burlesque houses, millions of Tijuana Bibles were sold at the height of their popularity in the 1930s. They went into a steep decline after World War II and by the mid-1950s only a small trickle of new product was still appearing on the market, mainly in the form of cheaply printed, poorly drawn and tasteless little eight pagers which sold for 10 cents each in run-down candy stores and gas stations, circulating mainly among delinquent teenagers. [ citation needed ]\n\nStarting in 1932, Norman Pett drew a strip called Jane for the British Daily Mirror newspaper. The heroine would often find herself in awkward situations where she would lose her clothing for one reason or another. The strip was written to some extent for a military audience to boost the morale of troops away from home. Winston Churchill said that Jane was Britain's \"secret weapon\". \n\nIn the United States, pulp magazines such as Harry Donenfeld 's Spicy Detective featured comics on heroines who lose their clothing, such as Adolphe Barreaux's Sally the Sleuth which debuted in 1934. Many of the early comic publishers got their start in the pulps with Donenfeld for instance going on to found DC Comics . Fiction House similarly started as a pulp magazine publisher, but in 1938, released Jumbo Comics featuring Sheena, Queen of the Jungle , the first of many scantily clad jungle girls. Fiction House comics routinely featured attractive women on the covers, a trend which later became referred to as ' good girl art .' In 1941, Quality Comics put out Police Comics featuring Phantom Lady , a scantily clad crime fighter. Fox Feature Syndicate eventually began publishing Phantom Lady where she was drawn by Matt Baker , one of the most famous 'good girl' artists. Milton Caniff started producing the comic strip Male Call in 1943, and Bill Ward came out with Torchy in 1944 featuring sexy heroines. [ citation needed ]\n\nPulp magazines were also known for their violence. The Shadow carried two guns for killing criminals, and Batman also wielded a gun from 1939 through 1944 before giving it up. Crime and horror comics were popular genres in the late 1940s and early 1950s with such titles as Lev Gleason Publications ' Crime Does Not Pay , EC Comics ' Crime Suspenstories , Crypt of Terror , Tales From the Crypt and Vault of Horror all enjoying brief spells of interest. It is believed that EC had one of the best-selling lines at the time. Harvey Kurtzman was one of the key writers for EC, and artists such as Wally Wood or Al Williamson began to do research for each new story far beyond what had been seen in titles published up to that time. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn the 1950s Irving Klaw published a line of underground fetish and bondage comics by artists like Eric Stanton , John Willie , and Gene Bilbrew . These never achieved widespread popularity but were kept in print for many years, sold through Klaw's mail order catalog to the same customers who bought his bondage photographs of Bettie Page . Not quite obscene enough to warrant prosecution, they skirted the limits of legality by avoiding full frontal nudity in their depictions. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1954, a psychologist Dr. Fredric Wertham came out with a book Seduction of the Innocent that claimed that the rise in juvenile delinquency being reported in the news at the time was fueled by comic books. He claimed that Batman and Robin were encouraging homosexuality, and decried the bondage seen in Wonder Woman's comic book. EC Comics came under criticism for the graphic violence and gore seen in its crime and horror books. EC publisher William Gaines was called before a Senate committee to testify, but he remained defensive saying that he was already censoring the more extreme things from his books. Partly in order to avoid the government imposing a solution, the other major publishers banded together to form the Comics Code Authority which would screen comics before they went to press, and only allow the Code mark to appear if the comic passed their standards. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Code was strict. It barred publishers from using the words 'crime,' 'horror' or 'terror' in their titles, thus forcing EC to abandon some of their most popular titles. Police officers could not be portrayed in a negative light, and if a villain committed murder, he would have to be caught and punished by the end of the story. No mention was allowed of vampires, werewolves or zombies, another swipe at EC. Years later when Marvel introduced zombies into their books, they had to call them 'zuvembies' in order to pass the Code. In general, DC and Marvel were supportive of the Code, but EC struggled to cope with the new rules, and eventually abandoned most of their titles to focus on Mad magazine, which did not need Code approval. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe code also contained provisions against suggestive or salacious illustration, and required that females be drawn realistically without undue exposure. This was a knock at Fiction House 's good girl art covers, and may have contributed to Fiction House's closure. [ citation needed ]\n\nNorth American comic books tend to be around 7 by 10 inches in size. Magazines vary, but are usually larger. Comic books tended to have a Comic Code label marking them as suitable for children, while magazines had no such requirement. This led to magazines becoming one of the most common formats for adult comics. [ citation needed ]\n\nPlayboy magazine first came out in 1953. It would feature single panel cartoons by artists such as Alberto Vargas , Archie Comics artist Dan DeCarlo , Plastic Man creator Jack Cole , LeRoy Neiman and later Olivia De Berardinis and Dean Yeagle . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn the mid-1960s, Playboy magazine started including a multipage strip called Little Annie Fanny by EC alumni Harvey Kurtzman and Will Elder with an occasional assist from artist Frank Frazetta . Annie had trouble keeping her clothes on, a trend seen also in the strips The Adventures of Phoebe Zeit-Geist , Wallace Wood 's Sally Forth , and Penthouse ' s Oh Wicked Wanda by Ron Embleton and Frederic Mullally . Penthouse would later put out a number of erotic comic magazines: Penthouse Comix , Penthouse Men's Adventure and Penthouse Max with the likes of Adam Hughes contributing artwork. Penthouse later revived the series as the bi-monthly series Penthouse Comics in 2024. \n\nFrom 1965, Warren Publishing started publishing two black and white magazines, Creepy and Eerie , commissioning work from the artists who had worked on EC's horror line. Warren added Vampirella in 1969, and then the science fiction magazine titled 1984 (later 1994 ) starting in the year 1978. The large format of these titles meant that they could be sold with other magazines aimed at adults rather than displayed in comic racks where the child-oriented titles were found. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe publishers of the American humor magazine National Lampoon discovered the French adult magazine Métal hurlant , and in 1977 started publishing Heavy Metal translating the work of Milo Manara , Caza , Vittorio Giardino , Jean-Claude Forest , Jean Giraud (a.k.a. Moebius) and Guido Crepax for an English audience. Heavy Metal also provided a forum for the work of American creators such as Richard Corben and Howard Chaykin . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1974, Larry Flynt came out with Hustler Magazine , which featured a strip called Honey Hooker with art originally by James McQuade and later by Tom Garst. Starting in the early 1970s, McQuade drew a series of erotic comic stories featuring the character Misty. \n\nIn 1983, Warren went bankrupt, but more recently, Dark Horse Comics has been reprinting some of Warren's old stories, and has revived the Creepy and Eerie magazines. [ citation needed ]\n\nAdult comics continued underground in the late 1960s outside the umbrella of the CCA. The underground comics movement was spearheaded by creators such as Art Spiegelman , Robert Crumb , Harvey Pekar , Kim Deitch and Spain Rodriguez . Larry Welz appeared in the 1980s with his Cherry book, an underground-style erotic parody of Archie Comics . These titles were often sold at head shops , but these establishments were often at loggerheads with the police, sometimes making distribution difficult. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1966, Wally Wood hit upon the idea of publishing his own comic, and selling it through comic book specialty shops. Recruiting star creators from among his friends, witzend featured one-off strips on a wide variety of themes by the likes of Jack Kirby , Steve Ditko , Frank Frazetta , Gil Kane and Art Spiegelman . [ citation needed ]\n\nFantagraphics Books began in 1976, publishing the Comics Journal and later Amazing Heroes with text articles about the comics field, but they began publishing actual comics in 1982, notably Love and Rockets by Gilbert and Jaime Hernandez . In 1990, Fantagraphics established their Eros Comix imprint, reprinting titles by Wally Wood and Frank Thorne as well as Gilbert's Birdland . [ citation needed ]\n\nCanadian Dave Sim began publishing Cerebus in 1977, and Richard and Wendy Pini put out Elfquest starting in 1978, initially through their own WaRP company. Pacific Comics was formed in 1981, and became the first publisher of Dave Stevens 's Rocketeer which was eventually made into a movie. Stevens modeled one of the characters on Bettie Page harkening back to an earlier era of clandestine publishing. [ citation needed ]\n\nAntarctic Press was founded in 1984, and publishes American manga and independent creators, notably Terry Moore 's Strangers in Paradise . [ citation needed ]\n\nDark Horse Comics was founded in 1986. Its first comic book was the adult-oriented anthology, Dark Horse Presents , which published Frank Miller 's noirish Sin City , later made into a feature film. [ citation needed ]\n\nAvatar Press began providing a showcase for the works of Alan Moore and Al Rio in 1996. Top Shelf Productions was formed in 1997, publishing Moore and Melinda Gebbie 's Lost Girls erotic graphic novel. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe publisher of Marvel Comics in the 1960s, Martin Goodman , was also the publisher for a number of men's adventure magazines: Men , Male and Stag . In these magazines, they included a strip called The Adventures of Pussycat drawn by Wally Wood and Bill Ward . These strips were eventually collected, and released as a one-shot magazine in 1968. Inside, it is listed as being printed by Marvel Comics, but there is no Marvel logo on the cover, nor any Comics Code mark. The lack of a Comics Code mark came to be a subtle sign that one might find adult content inside. [ citation needed ]\n\nIntrigued by Warren's success with their black and white titles, Marvel Comics tried their hand at this field as well releasing Savage Tales starting in 1971, Tomb of Dracula in 1972 and Savage Sword of Conan in 1974. In 1974, Marvel even released three issues of Comix Book under their Curtis imprint featuring the work of underground creators. Heavy Metal ' s success with glossy color science fiction and fantasy didn't go unnoticed either, and in 1980, Marvel released their Epic Illustrated magazine as well as a number of adult themed graphic novels under the Epic label. By 1986 though, they had cancelled Epic Illustrated , although Savage Sword of Conan continued running until 1995. [ citation needed ]\n\nBy the 1980s, there was a growing trend towards grim and gritty anti-heroes and increasing violence in comics. Marvel Comics ' Punisher received his own title in 1985, and in 1986, DC Comics ' Watchmen by Alan Moore and The Dark Knight Returns by Frank Miller explored issues related to vigilantes . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1986, DC Comics started publishing comics with the words \"For Mature Readers\" or \"Suggested for Mature Readers\" on their covers. These mature readers titles included The Shadow (1986), The Question (from #8 1987-), Slash Maraud (1987-8), Swamp Thing (from #57 1987-), Vigilante (from #44 1987-8), Wasteland (1987-), Batman: The Killing Joke (1988), Green Arrow (#1-62 1988-92), Haywire (1988-9), Hellblazer (1988-), Tailgunner Jo (1988-9), V for Vendetta (1988-), Blackhawk (1989–90), Deadman : Love After Death (1989), Gilgamesh II (1989), The Sandman (1989-), Doom Patrol (1990-), Shade the Changing Man (1990-), Twilight (1990), World Without End (1990-1), Mister E (1991), Animal Man (1992-), Deadman : Exorcism (1992) and Mighty Love (2004). [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1993, DC started up their Vertigo imprint that allowed explicit content in selected titles, grouping a number of their mature readers titles together. Notable Vertigo titles include the Eisner Award winners, Fables , 100 Bullets , Preacher and The Sandman as well as several books that have been adapted into feature films, Hellblazer , A History of Violence , Stardust and V for Vendetta . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 2001, Marvel Comics withdrew from the Comics Code Authority , and set up their own content rating system, and an adult-oriented Max imprint. In January 2011, DC announced that they were withdrawing from the Comics Code as well, and the sole remaining CCA member Archie Comics withdrew the day after, bringing the code to its end. [ citation needed ]\n\nSome adult comics are pornographic , focusing substantially on sexual activity, either for its own sake or as a major story element. As such they are usually not permitted to be legally sold to minors. Some examples grew out of the underground comix scene, such as Cherry by Larry Welz , which parodied Archie Comics . Omaha the Cat Dancer by Kate Worley and Reed Waller combined sexually explicit material with a melodrama featuring anthropomorphic animals . XXXenophile by Phil Folgio blended science fiction and fantasy scenarios with sexual situations. [ citation needed ]\n\nEarly comics produced for gay and bisexual male readers often focused on sexual situations, such as Kake by Tom of Finland and Harry Chess by Al Shapiro . Although gay comics have expanded to cover a variety of genres, erotica has continued to be popular sometimes incorporated into other genres, such as the erotic superheroes published by Class Comics , the wordless graphic novels written by Dale Lazarov , and yaoi hentai produced in Japan. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe French comics anthology Pilote was published from 1959 to 1989, and featured the work of adult-oriented creators such as Jean Giraud (Moebius), Guido Crepax , Caza and the American Robert Crumb . By 1974, Jean Giraud and some of his comrades had become dissatisfied with Pilote , and broke off to found the Metal Hurlant magazine to showcase adult comics in the science fiction or fantasy genres. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn France in 1962, Jean-Claude Forest started producing a strip called Barbarella , set in outer space, but where the heroine found herself losing her clothing or ending up in sexual situations. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1965, the Belgian artist Guy Peellaert released the first graphic novel, The Adventures of Jodelle . In Italy, Guido Crepax starting publishing Valentina in Linus magazine. In 1966, also in Italy, the artist Sandro Angiolini put out the first issue of Isabella . In 1968, Yves Duval and Dino Attanasio started writing/drawing a sexy strip called Candida for the Belgian magazine Cine-Revue. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn England, in 1969, writer Jo Addams and artist Luis Roca started publishing the Scarth A.D. 2195 strip in the newspaper, The Sun . In 1972, Don Lawrence started producing a strip Carrie for Mayfair magazine. In 1976, John Richardson started drawing the strip Amanda also for The Sun . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1977, the British anthology 2000 A.D. first appeared, and featured the work of many writers and artists who were to become influential in the adult comics field in the U.S. later, notably Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons who co-created Watchmen and Neil Gaiman who went on to work on The Sandman . In 1978, artist Enrique Badia Romero and writer Donne Avenell starting producing the strip Axa for The Sun .\n\nIn 1978, the Belgian company Casterman started putting out the magazine À Suivre attracting submissions by many of the same contributors who were seen in Metal Hurlant . Catalan Communications and more recently NBM Publishing have also published adult works from Europe mostly as standalone graphic novels, although NBM now has an anthology magazine called Sizzle . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1979, the British magazine Viz first appeared parodying earlier British comics anthologies with an injection of incongruous sex or violence. In 1982, Raymond Briggs tried to give British comics a more serious tone with works such as When the Wind Blows about an older couple trying to come to terms with the aftermath of a nuclear attack. [ citation needed ]\n\nHoracio Altuna is an Argentine artist who has done many four page strips for Playboy Magazine's Spanish, Italian and German editions. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn Japan, comic books ( manga ) intended for adults are usually divided into ' seinen manga ' (青年漫画　comics for men) and ' josei manga ' (女性漫画　comics for women). Erotic comics aimed at men are referred to as 'seijin-muke manga' (成人向け漫画) or 'ero manga' and those aimed at women are called 'ladies comics' (レーディーズ・コミック) (see also the English loanword ' hentai '). Shonen manga for boys tend to outsell seinen manga which in turn outsell seijin-muke manga. \n\nSome of the first specialized manga magazines were aimed at adult men. Weekly Manga Times debuted in 1956, and originally focused on erotic fiction and 'porno manga'. Weekly Manga Goraku first came out in 1964, and was also aimed at the relatively older demographic of men from their 30s through to their 50s. Manga Action and Young Comic debuted in 1967, followed by Big Comic in 1968, with Weekly Young Jump following in 1979, and Weekly Young Magazine in 1980. Manga with the word 'young' in the title tend to be aimed at a younger demographic of 15-30s. [ citation needed ]",
  "A mural is any piece of graphic artwork that is painted or applied directly to a wall, ceiling or other permanent substrate. Mural techniques include fresco , mosaic , graffiti and marouflage .\n\nThe word mural is a Spanish adjective that is used to refer to what is attached to a wall. The term mural later became a noun. In art, the word began to be used at the beginning of the 20th century.\n\nIn 1906, Dr. Atl issued a manifesto calling for the development of a monumental public art movement in Mexico; he named it in Spanish pintura mural (English: wall painting ). \n\nIn ancient Roman times, a mural crown was given to the fighter who was first to scale the wall of a besieged town. \"Mural\" comes from the Latin muralis , meaning \"wall painting\". This word is related to murus , meaning \"wall\".\n\nMurals of sorts date to Upper Paleolithic times such as the cave paintings in the Lubang Jeriji Saléh cave in Borneo (40,000–52,000 BP), Chauvet Cave in Ardèche department of southern France (around 32,000 BP). Many ancient murals have been found within ancient Egyptian tombs (around 3150 BC), the Minoan palaces (Middle period III of the Neopalatial period, 1700–1600 BC), the Oxtotitlán cave and Juxtlahuaca in Mexico (around 1200–900 BC) and in Pompeii (around 100 BC – AD 79).\n\nDuring the Middle Ages murals were usually executed on dry plaster (secco). The huge collection of Kerala mural painting dating from the 14th century are examples of fresco secco . In Italy, c. 1300 , the technique of painting of frescos on wet plaster was reintroduced and led to a significant increase in the quality of mural painting. \n\nThe term mural became better known with the Mexican muralism art movement ( Diego Rivera , David Siqueiros and José Orozco ). The first mural painted in the 20th century, was “El árbol de la vida”, by Roberto Montenegro .\n\nThere are many different styles and techniques. The best-known is probably fresco , which uses pigments dispersed in water with a damp lime wash , rapid use of the resulting mixture over a large surface, and often in parts (but with a sense of the whole). The colors lighten as they dry. The marouflage method has also been used for millennia.\n\nMurals today are painted in a variety of ways, using oil or water-based media. The styles can vary from abstract to trompe-l'œil (a French term for \"fool\" or \"trick the eye\"). Initiated by the works of mural artists like Graham Rust or Rainer Maria Latzke in the 1980s, trompe-l'œil painting has experienced a renaissance in private and public buildings in Europe.\nToday, the beauty of a wall mural has become much more widely available with a technique whereby a painting or photographic image is transferred to poster paper or canvas which is then pasted to a wall surface (see wallpaper , Frescography ) to give the effect of either a hand-painted mural or realistic scene.\n\nA special type of mural painting is Lüftlmalerei , still practised today in the villages of the Alpine valleys. Well-known examples of such façade designs from the 18th and 19th centuries can be found in Mittenwald , Garmisch , Unter- and Oberammergau .\n\nIn the history of murals, several methods have been used:\n\nA fresco painting, from the Italian word affresco which derives from the adjective fresco (\"fresh\"), describes a method in which the paint is applied on plaster on walls or ceilings.\n\nThe buon fresco technique consists of painting in pigment mixed with water on a thin layer of wet, fresh, lime mortar or plaster . The pigment is then absorbed by the wet plaster; after a number of hours, the plaster dries and reacts with the air: it is this chemical reaction which fixes the pigment particles in the plaster. After this, the painting stays for a long time up to centuries in fresh and brilliant colors.\n\nFresco-secco painting is done on dry plaster ( secco is \"dry\" in Italian). The pigments thus require a binding medium, such as egg ( tempera ), glue or oil to attach the pigment to the wall.\n\nMezzo-fresco is painted on nearly-dry plaster, and was defined by the sixteenth-century author Ignazio Pozzo as \"firm enough not to take a thumb-print\" so that the pigment only penetrates slightly into the plaster. By the end of the sixteenth century, this had largely displaced the buon fresco method, and was used by painters such as Gianbattista Tiepolo or Michelangelo . This technique had, in reduced form, the advantages of a secco work.\n\nIn Greco-Roman times, mostly encaustic colors applied in a cold state were used. \n\nTempera painting is one of the oldest known methods in mural painting. In tempera, the pigments are bound in an albuminous medium such as egg yolk or egg white diluted in water.\n\nIn 16th-century Europe, oil painting on canvas arose as an easier method for mural painting. The advantage was that the artwork could be completed in the artist's studio and later transported to its destination and there attached to the wall or ceiling. Oil paint may be a less satisfactory medium for murals because of its lack of brilliance in colour. Also, the pigments are yellowed by the binder or are more easily affected by atmospheric conditions.\n\nDifferent muralists tend to become experts in their preferred medium and application, whether that be oil paints, emulsion or acrylic paints applied by brush, roller or airbrush/aerosols. Clients will often ask for a particular style and the artist may adjust to the appropriate technique. \n\nA consultation usually leads to detailed design and layout of the proposed mural with a price quote that the client approves before the muralist starts on the work. The area to be painted can be gridded to match the design allowing the image to be scaled accurately step by step. In some cases, the design is projected straight onto the wall and traced with pencil before painting begins. Some muralists will paint directly without any prior sketching, preferring the spontaneous technique.\n\nOnce completed the mural can be given coats of varnish or protective acrylic glaze to protect the work from UV rays and surface damage.\n\nIn modern, quick form of muralling, young enthusiasts also use POP clay mixed with glue or bond to give desired models on canvas board. The canvas is later set aside to let the clay dry. Once dried, the canvas and the shape can be painted with your choice of colors and later coated with varnish.\n\nAs an alternative to a hand-painted or airbrushed mural, digitally printed murals can also be applied to surfaces. Already existing murals can be photographed and then be reproduced in near-to-original quality.\n\nThe disadvantages of pre-fabricated murals and decals are that they are often mass-produced and lack the allure and exclusivity of original artwork. They are often not fitted to the individual wall sizes of the client and their personal ideas or wishes cannot be added to the mural as it progresses. The Frescography technique, a digital manufacturing method ( CAM ) invented by Rainer Maria Latzke addresses some of the personalisation and size restrictions.\n\nDigital techniques are commonly used in advertisements. A \"wallscape\" is a large advertisement on or attached to the outside wall of a building. Wallscapes can be painted directly on the wall as a mural, or printed on vinyl and securely attached to the wall in the manner of a billboard . Although not strictly classed as murals, large scale printed media are often referred to as such. Advertising murals were traditionally painted onto buildings and shops by sign-writers, later as large scale poster billboards .\n\nMurals are important as they bring art into the public sphere. Due to the size, cost, and work involved in creating a mural, muralists must often be commissioned by a sponsor. Often it is the local government or a business, but many murals have been paid for with grants of patronage . For artists, their work gets a wide audience who otherwise might not set foot in an art gallery. A city benefits by the beauty of a work of art.\n\nMurals can be a relatively effective tool of social emancipation or achieving a political goal. Murals have sometimes been created against the law, or have been commissioned by local bars and coffee shops. Often, the visual effects are an enticement to attract public attention to social issues. State-sponsored public art expressions, particularly murals, are often used by totalitarian regimes as a tool of propaganda. However, despite the propagandist character of that works, some of them still have an artistic value. [ citation needed ]\n\nMurals can have a dramatic impact whether consciously or subconsciously on the attitudes of passers-by, when they are added to areas where people live and work. It can also be argued that the presence of large, public murals can add aesthetic improvement to the daily lives of residents or that of employees at a corporate venue. Large-format hand-painted murals were the norm for advertisements in cities across America, before the introduction of vinyl and digital posters. It was an expensive form of advertising with strict signage laws but gained attention and improved local aesthetics. \n\nOther world-famous murals can be found in Mexico , New York City , Philadelphia , Belfast , Derry , Los Angeles , Nicaragua , Cuba , the Philippines , and in India . They have functioned as an important means of communication for members of socially, ethnically and racially divided communities in times of conflict. They also proved to be an effective tool in establishing a dialogue and hence solving the cleavage in the long run.\nThe Indian state Kerala has exclusive murals . These Kerala mural painting are on walls of Hindu temples . They can be dated from 9th century AD.\n\nThe San Bartolo murals of the Maya civilization in Guatemala , are the oldest example of this art in Mesoamerica and are dated at 300 BC.\n\nMany rural towns have begun using murals to create tourist attractions in order to boost economic income. Colquitt, Georgia was chosen to host the 2010 Global Mural Conference. The town had more than twelve murals completed, and hosted the Conference along with Dothan, Alabama , and Blakely, Georgia .\n\nThe Mexican mural movement in the 1930s brought new prominence to murals as a social and political tool. Diego Rivera , José Orozco and David Siqueiros were the most famous artists of the movement. Between 1932 and 1940, Rivera also painted murals in San Francisco , Detroit , and New York City . In 1933, he completed a famous series of twenty-seven fresco panels entitled Detroit Industry on the walls of an inner court at the Detroit Institute of Arts . During the McCarthyism of the 1950s, a large sign was placed in the courtyard defending the artistic merit of the murals while attacking his politics as \"detestable\".\n\nIn 1948, the Colombian government hosted the IX Pan-American Conference to establish the Marshall plan for the Americas. The director of the OEA and the Colombian government commissioned master Santiago Martinez Delgado , to paint a mural in the Colombian congress building to commemorate the event. Martinez decided to make it about the Cúcuta Congress , and painted Bolívar in front of Santander , making liberals upset; so, due to the murder of Jorge Elieser Gaitan the mobs of el bogotazo tried to burn the capitol, but the Colombian Army stopped them. Years later, in the 1980s, with liberals in charge of the Congress, they passed a resolution to turn the whole chamber in the Elliptic Room 90 degrees to put the main mural on the side and commissioned Alejandro Obregon to paint a non-partisan mural in the surrealist style.\n\nIn Chile, the Romana Parra Brigade painted political murals in support of workers rights and Communism. \n\nNorthern Ireland contains some of the most famous political murals in the world. Almost 2,000 murals have been documented in Northern Ireland since the 1970s. In recent times, many murals are non-sectarian, concerning political and social issues such as racism and environmentalism, and many are completely apolitical, depicting children at play and scenes from everyday life. (See Northern Irish murals .)\n\nA not political, but social related mural covers a wall in an old building, once a prison, at the top of a cliff in Bardiyah, in Libya. It was painted and signed by the artist in April 1942, weeks before his death on the first day of the First Battle of El Alamein . Known as the Bardia Mural , it was created by English artist, private John Frederick Brill . \n\nIn 1961 East Germany began to erect a wall between East and West Berlin , which became famous as the Berlin Wall . While on the East Berlin side painting was not allowed, artists painted on the Western side of the Wall from the 80s until the fall of the Wall in 1989.\n\nMany unknown and known artists such as Thierry Noir and Keith Haring painted on the Wall, the \"World's longest canvas \". The sometimes detailed artwork were often painted over within hours or days. On the Western side the Wall was not protected, so everybody could paint on the Wall. After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the Eastern side of the Wall became also a popular \"canvas\" for many mural and graffiti artists. Orgosolo , in Sardinia , is a most important center of murals politics .\n\nIt is also common for mural graffiti to be used as a memoir. In the 2001 book Somebody Told Me , Rick Bragg writes about a series of communities, mainly located in New York, that have walls dedicated to the people who died. These memorials, both written word and mural style, provide the deceased to be present in the communities in which they lived. Bragg states that the \"murals have woven themselves in the fabric of the neighborhoods, and the city\". These memorials remind people of the deaths caused by inner city violence.\n\nMany people like to express their individuality by commissioning an artist to paint a mural in their home. This is not an activity exclusively for owners of large houses. A mural artist is only limited by the fee and therefore the time spent on the painting; dictating the level of detail; a simple mural can be added to the smallest of walls.\n\nPrivate commissions can be for dining rooms, bathrooms, living rooms or, as is often the case- children's bedrooms. A child's room can be transformed into the 'fantasy world' of a forest or racing track , encouraging imaginative play and an awareness of art.\n\nThe current trend for feature walls has increased commissions for muralists in the UK. A large hand-painted mural can be designed on a specific theme, incorporate personal images and elements and may be altered during the course of painting it. The personal interaction between client and muralist is often a unique experience for an individual not usually involved in the arts.\n\nIn the 1980s, illusionary wall painting experienced a renaissance in private homes. The reason for this revival in interior design could, in some cases be attributed to the reduction in living space for the individual. Faux architectural features, as well as natural scenery and views, can have the effect of 'opening out' the walls. Densely built-up areas of housing may also contribute to people's feelings of being cut off from nature in its free form. A mural commission of this sort may be an attempt by some people to re-establish a balance with nature.\n\nCommissions of murals in schools, hospitals, and retirement homes can achieve a pleasing and welcoming atmosphere in these caring institutions. Murals in other public buildings, such as public houses are also common.\n\nRecently, graffiti and street art have played a key role in contemporary wall painting. Such graffiti/street artists as Keith Haring , Shepard Fairey , Above , Mint&Serf, Futura 2000 , Os Gemeos , and Faile among others have successfully transcended their street art aesthetic beyond the walls of urban landscape and onto walls of private and corporate clients. As graffiti/street art became more mainstream in the late 1990s, youth-oriented brands such as Nike and Red Bull, with Wieden Kennedy, have turned to graffiti/street artists to decorate walls of their respective offices. This trend continued through 2000's with graffiti/street art gaining more recognition from art institutions worldwide.\n\nMany homeowners choose to display the traditional art and culture of their society or events from their history in their homes. Ethnic murals have become an important form of interior decoration. Warli painting murals are becoming a preferred mode of wall decor in India. Warli painting is an ancient Indian art form in which the tribal people used to depict different phases of their life on the walls of their mud houses.\n\nTile murals are murals made out of stone, ceramic, porcelain, glass and or metal tiles that are installed within, or added onto the surface of an existing wall. They are also inlaid into floors. Mural tiles are painted, glazed, sublimation printed (as described below) or more traditionally cut out of stone, ceramic, mosaic glass(opaque) and stained glass. Some artists use pottery and plates broken into pieces. Unlike the traditional painted murals described above, tile murals are always made by fitting pieces of the selected materials together to create the design or image.\n\nMosaic murals are made by combining small 1/4\" to 2\" size pieces of colorful stone, ceramic, or glass tiles which are then laid out to create a picture. Modern day technology has allowed commercial mosaic mural makers to use computer programs to separate photographs into colors that are automatically cut and glued onto sheets of mesh creating precise murals fast and in large quantities.\n\nThe azulejo ( Portuguese pronunciation: [ɐzuˈleʒu] , Spanish pronunciation: [aθuˈlexo] ) refers to a typical form of Portuguese or Spanish painted, tin-glazed , ceramic tilework . They have become a typical aspect of Portuguese culture , manifesting without interruption during five centuries, the consecutive trends in art.\n\nAzulejos can be found inside and outside churches , palaces , ordinary houses and even railway stations or subway stations .\n\nThey were not only used as an ornamental art form, but also had a specific functional capacity like temperature control in homes. Many azulejos chronicle major historical and cultural aspects of Portuguese history .\n\nCustom-printed tile murals can be produced using digital images for kitchen splashbacks, wall displays, and flooring. Digital photos and artwork can be resized and printed to accommodate the desired size for the area to be decorated. Custom tile printing uses a variety of techniques including dye sublimation and ceramic-type laser toners. The latter technique can yield fade-resistant custom tiles which are suitable for long term exterior exposure.",
  "Biographers are authors who write an account of another person's life, while autobiographers are authors who write their own biography .\n\nCountries of working life: Ab=Arabia, AG=Ancient Greece, Al=Australia, Am=Armenian, AR=Ancient Rome, Au=Austria, AH=Austria/Hungary, Ca=Canada, En=England, Fl=Finland, Fr=France, Ge=Germany, Id=Indonesia, In=India, Ir=Ireland, Is=Israel, Jp=Japan, Nw=Norway, SA=South Africa, Sc=Scotland, SL=Sierra Leone, So=Somalia, Sp=Spain, Sw=Sweden, TT=Trinidad & Tobago, US=United States, Ve=Venezuela, Wl=Wales",
  "The Light-Life Movement , also known as the Oasis Movement , is an organisation within the Catholic Church . The group originated in Poland thanks to the efforts of Franciszek Blachnicki .\n\nThe history of the Movement dates back to the first retreat , which took place in 1954 with the participation of altar boys. Before 1976 movement was known as \"the Oasis Movement\", \"the Movement of the Living Church\", \"the Movement of the Immaculate.\" The creator of the oasis, the founder and first national moderator of the movement was Servant of God Fr. Franciszek Blachnicki (buried in Good Shepherd Church in Krościenko ), who died in 1987 in Germany where he worked after the beginning of the martial law in Poland . The Light-Life Movement has been founded and developed in Poland but it has already spread to other countries: Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Germany, Belarus, Latvia, Ukraine, Great Britain, Ireland, Canada, USA, Kenya, China and Pakistan. There are also small groups or communities in Norway, Sweden, Greece, France, Belgium, Luxemburg and Bulgaria. There are no exact figures on the number of members of the Movement. \n\nThe Movement gathers together people of various ages and vocations. The family branch of the Movement, for married couples, is called the Domestic Church. Small groups of the members of the Movement usually form a community in a Catholic parish. Catholic priests work in the Movement as its \"moderators\" or directors. They are responsible for the spiritual formation of the members. The person responsible for the whole Movement is the General Moderator, currently Fr. Marek Sędek.\n\nSpirituality of the Light-Life Movement has been expressed in The Guideposts of the New Man . The formation programme is at the heart of the Movement and is based upon the document Order of Christian Initiation of Adults . [ better source needed ]",
  "A record producer or music producer is a music creating project's overall supervisor whose responsibilities can involve a range of creative and technical leadership roles. Typically the job involves hands-on oversight of recording sessions; ensuring artists deliver acceptable and quality performances, supervising the technical engineering of the recording, and coordinating the production team and process. The producer's involvement in a musical project can vary in depth and scope. Sometimes in popular genres the producer may create the recording's entire sound and structure. However, in classical music recording, for example, the producer serves as more of a liaison between the conductor and the engineering team. The role is often likened to that of a film director though there are important differences. It is distinct from the role of an executive producer , who is mostly involved in the recording project on an administrative level, and from the audio engineer who operates the recording technology.\n\nVarying by project, the producer may or may not choose all of the artists. If employing only synthesized or sampled instrumentation, the producer may be the sole artist. Conversely, some artists do their own production. Some producers are their own engineers, operating the technology across the project: preproduction, recording, mixing , and mastering . Record producers' precursors were \"A&R men\", who likewise could blend entrepreneurial, creative, and technical roles, but often exercised scant creative influence, as record production still focused, into the 1950s, on simply improving the record's sonic match to the artists' own live performance. \n\nAdvances in recording technology, especially the 1940s advent of tape recording —which Les Paul promptly innovated further to develop multitrack recording —and the 1950s rise of electronic instruments, turned record production into a specialty. In popular music, then, producers like George Martin , Phil Spector and Brian Eno led its evolution into its present use of elaborate techniques and unrealistic sounds, creating songs impossible to originate live. After the 1980s, production's move from analog to digital further expanded possibilities. By now, DAWs, or digital audio workstations , like Logic Pro , Pro Tools and Studio One , turn an ordinary computer into a production console, whereby a solitary novice can become a skilled producer in a thrifty home studio. In the 2010s, efforts began to increase the prevalence of producers and engineers who are women, heavily outnumbered by men and prominently accoladed only in classical music. \n\nAs a broad project, the creation of a popular music recording may be split across three specialists: the executive producer , who oversees business partnerships and financing; the vocal producer or vocal arranger, who aids vocal performance via expert critique and coaching of vocal technique, and the record producer or music producer, who, often called simply the producer, directs the overall creative process of recording the song in its final mix.\n\nThe producer's roles can include gathering ideas, composing music, choosing session musicians , proposing changes to song arrangements, coaching the performers, controlling sessions, supervising the audio mixing , and, in some cases, supervising the audio mastering . A producer may give creative control to the artists themselves, taking a supervisory or advisory role instead. As to qualifying for a Grammy nomination, the Recording Academy defines a producer: \n\nThe person who has overall creative and technical control of the entire recording project, and the individual recording sessions that are part of that project. He or she is present in the recording studio or at the location recording and works directly with the artist and engineer. The producer makes creative and aesthetic decisions that realize both the artist's and label's goals in the creation of musical content. Other duties include, but are not limited to: keeping budgets and schedules; adhering to deadlines; hiring musicians, singers, studios, and engineers; overseeing other staffing needs; and editing (Classical projects).\n\nThe producer often selects and collaborates with a mixing engineer, who focuses on the especially technological aspects of the recording process, namely, operating the electronic equipment and blending the raw, recorded tracks of the chosen performances, whether vocal or instrumental, into a mix , either stereo or surround sound. Then a mastering engineer further adjusts this recording for distribution on the chosen media. A producer may work on only one or two songs or on an artist's entire album, helping develop the album's overall vision. The record producers may also take on the role of executive producer, managing the budget, schedules, contracts, and negotiations.\n\n(Artists and Repertoires)\n\nIn the 1880s, the record industry began by simply having the artist perform at a phonograph . In 1924, the trade journal Talking Machine World , covering the phonography and record industry, reported that Eddie King, Victor Records ' manager of the \"New York artist and repertoire department\", had planned a set of recordings in Los Angeles. Later, folklorist Archie Green called this perhaps the earliest printed use of A&R man . Actually, it says neither \"A&R man\" nor even \"A&R\", an initialism perhaps coined by Billboard magazine in 1946, and entering wide use in the late 1940s. \n\nIn the 1920s and 1930s, A&R executives, like Ben Selvin at Columbia Records , Nathaniel Shilkret at Victor Records, and Bob Haring at Brunswick Records became the precursors of record producers, supervising recording and often leading session orchestras. During the 1940s, major record labels increasingly opened official A&R departments, whose roles included supervision of recording. Meanwhile, independent recording studios opened, helping originate record producer as a specialty. [ citation needed ] But despite a tradition of some A&R men writing music, record production still referred to just the manufacturing of record discs. \n\nAfter World War II , pioneering A&R managers who transitioned influentially to record production as now understood, while sometimes owning independent labels, include J. Mayo Williams and John Hammond . Upon moving from Columbia Records to Mercury Records , Hammond appointed Mitch Miller to lead Mercury's popular recordings in New York. Miller then produced country-pop crossover hits by Patti Page and by Frankie Laine , moved from Mercury to Columbia, and became a leading A&R man of the 1950s. \n\nDuring the decade, A&R executives increasingly directed songs' sonic signatures, although many still simply teamed singers with musicians, while yet others exercised virtually no creative influence. The term record producer in its current meaning—the creative director of song production—appearing in a 1953 issue of Billboard magazine, became widespread in the 1960s. Still, a formal distinction was elusive for some time more. A&R managers might still be creative directors, like William \"Mickey\" Stevenson , hired by Berry Gordy , at the Motown record label. \n\nIn 1947, the American market gained audio recording onto magnetic tape. At the record industry's 1880s dawn, rather, recording was done by phonograph , etching the sonic waveform vertically into a cylinder. By the 1930s, a gramophone etched it laterally across a disc. Constrained in tonal range, whether bass or treble, and in dynamic range , records made a grand, concert piano sound like a small, upright piano, and maximal duration was four and a half minutes. Selections and performance were often altered accordingly, and playing this disc—the wax master—destroyed it. The finality often caused anxiety that restrained performance to prevent error. In the 1940s, during World War II, the Germans refined audio recording onto magnetic tape—uncapping recording duration and allowing immediate playback, rerecording, and editing—a technology that premised emergence of record producers in their current roles. \n\nEarly in the recording industry, a record was attained by simply having all of the artists perform together live in one take. In 1945, by recording a musical element while playing a previously recorded record, Les Paul developed a recording technique called \"sound on sound\". By this, the final recording could be built piece by piece and tailored, effecting an editing process. In one case, Paul produced a song via 500 recorded discs. But, besides the tedium of this process, it serially degraded the sound quality of previously recorded elements, rerecorded as ambient sound. Yet in 1948, Paul adopted tape recording, enabling true multitrack recording by a new technique, \" overdubbing \". \n\nTo enable overdubbing, Paul revised the tape recorder itself by adding a second playback head, and terming it the preview head . Joining the preexisting recording head, erase head, and playback head, the preview head allows the artist to hear the extant recording over headphones playing it in synchrony, \"in sync\", with the present performance being recorded alone on an isolated track. This isolation of multiple tracks enables countless mixing possibilities. Producers began recording initially only the \"bed tracks\"—the rhythm section , including the bassline , drums, and rhythm guitar—whereas vocals and instrument solos could be added later. A horn section , for example, could record a week later, and a string section another week later. A singer could perform her own backup vocals, or a guitarist could play 15 layers.\n\nAcross the 1960s, popular music increasingly switched from acoustic instruments, like piano, upright bass , acoustic guitar , and brass instruments , to electronic instruments, like electric guitars , keyboards , and synthesizers , employing instrument amplifiers and speakers. These could mimic acoustic instruments or create utterly new sounds. Soon, by combining the capabilities of tape, multitrack recording, and electronic instruments, producers like Phil Spector , George Martin , and Joe Meek rendered sounds unattainable live. Similarly, in jazz fusion , Teo Macero , producing Miles Davis 's 1970 album Bitches Brew , spliced sections of extensive improvisation sessions.\n\nIn the 1960s, rock acts like the Beatles , the Rolling Stones , and the Kinks produced some of their own songs, although many such songs are officially credited to specialist producers. Yet especially influential was the Beach Boys, whose band leader Brian Wilson took over from his father Murry within a couple of years after the band's commercial breakthrough. By 1964, Wilson had taken Spector's techniques to unseen sophistication. Wilson alone produced all Beach Boys recordings between 1963 and 1967. Using multiple studios and multiple attempts of instrumental and vocal tracks, Wilson selected the best combinations of performance and audio quality, and used tape editing to assemble a composite performance.\n\nThe 1980s advent of digital processes and formats rapidly replaced analog processes and formats, namely, tape and vinyl. Although recording onto quality tape, at least half an inch wide and traveling 15 inches per second, had limited \"tape hiss\" to silent sections, digital's higher signal-to-noise ratio , SNR, abolished it. Digital also imparted to the music a perceived \"pristine\" sound quality, if also a loss of analog recordings' perceived \"warm\" quality and better-rounded bass. Yet whereas editing tape media requires physically locating the target audio on the ribbon, cutting there, and splicing pieces, editing digital media offers inarguable advantages in ease, efficiency, and possibilities.\n\nIn the 1990s, digital production reached affordable home computers via production software. By now, recording and mixing are often centralized in DAWs, digital audio workstations —for example, Pro Tools , Logic Pro , Ableton , Cubase , Reason , and FL Studio —for which plugins , by third parties, effect virtual studio technology . DAWs fairly standard in the industry are Logic Pro and Pro Tools. Physical devices involved include the main mixer, MIDI controllers to communicate among equipment, the recording device itself, and perhaps effects gear that is outboard. Yet literal recording is sometimes still analog, onto tape, whereupon the raw recording is converted to a digital signal for processing and editing, as some producers still find audio advantages to recording onto tape. \n\nConventionally, tape is more forgiving of overmodulation , whereby dynamic peaks exceed the maximal recordable signal level: tape's limitation, a physical property, is magnetic capacity, which tapers off, smoothing the overmodulated waveform even at a signal nearly 15 decibels too \"hot\", whereas a digital recording is ruined by harsh distortion of \" clipping \" at any overshoot. In digital recording, however, a recent advancement, 32-bit float , enables DAWs to undo clipping. Still, some criticize digital instruments and workflows for excess automation, allegedly impairing creative or sonic control. In any case, as production technology has drastically changed, so have the knowledge demands, although DAWs enables novices, even teenagers at home, to learn production independently. Some have attained professional competence before ever working with an artist. \n\nAmong female record producers, Sylvia Moy was the first at Motown , Gail Davies the first on Nashville's Music Row , and Ethel Gabriel , with RCA , the first at a major record label . Lillian McMurry , owning Trumpet Records , produced influential blues records. Meanwhile, Wilma Cozart Fine produced hundreds of records for Mercury Records ' classical division. For classical production, three women have won Grammy awards, and Judith Sherman 's 2015 win was her fifth. Yet in nonclassical, no woman has won Producer of the Year , awarded since 1975 and only one even nominated for a record not her own, Linda Perry. After Lauren Christy 's 2004 nomination, Linda Perry 's 2019 nomination was the next for a woman. On why no woman had ever won it, Perry commented, \"I just don't think there are that many women interested.\" In the U.K., Lynsey de Paul was an early female record producer, having produced both of her Ivor Novello award-winning songs. \n\nAcross the decades, many female artists have produced their own music. For instance, artists Kate Bush , Madonna , Mariah Carey , Shakira , Janet Jackson , Beyoncé (even that of Destiny's Child and the Carters ), Lana Del Rey , Taylor Swift , and Lorde have produced or coproduced and Ariana Grande who produces and arranges her vocals as well as being an audio engineer. Still among specialists, despite some prominent women, including Missy Elliott in hip hop and Sylvia Massy in rock, the vast majority have been men. Early in the 2010s, asked for insights that she herself had gleaned as a woman who has specialized successfully in the industry, Wendy Page remarked, \"The difficulties are usually very short-lived. Once people realize that you can do your job, sexism tends to lower its ugly head.\" Still, when tasked to explain her profession's sex disparity, Page partly reasoned that record labels, dominated by men, have been, she said, \"mistrustful of giving a woman the reins of an immense, creative project like making a record.\" Ultimately, the reasons are multiple and not fully clear, although prominently proposed factors include types of sexism and scarcity of female role models in the profession. \n\nWomen producers known for producing records not their own include Sonia Pottinger, Sylvia Robinson and Carla Olson.\n\nIn January 2018, a research team led by Stacy L. Smith, founder and director of the Annenberg Inclusion Initiative, based in the USC Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism , issued a report, estimating that in the prior several years, about 2% of popular songs' producers were female. Also that month, Billboard magazine queried, \"Where are all the female music producers?\" Upon the Annenberg Inclusion Initiative's second annual report, released in February 2019, its department at USC reported, \"2018 saw an outcry from artists, executives and other music industry professionals over the lack of women in music\" and \"the plight of women in music\", where women were allegedly being \"stereotyped, sexualized, and shut out\". Also in February 2019, the Recording Academy 's Task Force on Diversity and Inclusion announced an initiative whereby over 200 artists and producers—ranging from Cardi B and Taylor Swift to Maroon 5 and Quincy Jones —agreed to consider at least two women for each producer or engineer position. The academy's website, Grammy.com , announced, \"This initiative is the first step in a broader effort to improve those numbers and increase diversity and inclusion for all in the music industry.\" ",
  "Political history is the narrative and survey of political events, ideas, movements, organs of government, voters, parties and leaders. It is closely related to other fields of history, including diplomatic history , constitutional history , social history , people's history , and public history . Political history studies the organization and operation of power in large societies.\n\nFrom approximately the 1960s onwards, the rise of competing subdisciplines, particularly social history and cultural history, led to a decline in the prominence of \"traditional\" political history, which tended to focus on the activities of political elites. In the two decades from 1975 to 1995, the proportion of professors of history in American universities identifying with social history rose from 31% to 41%, and the proportion of political historians fell from 40% to 30%. \n\nThe political history of the world examines the history of politics and government on a global scale, including international relations.\n\nThe first \"scientific\" political history was written by Leopold von Ranke in Germany in the 19th century. His methodologies profoundly affected the way historians critically examine sources; see historiography for a more complete analysis of the methodology of various approaches to history. An important aspect of political history is the study of ideology as a force for historical change. One author asserts that \"political history as a whole cannot exist without the study of ideological differences and their implications.\" Studies of political history typically centre around a single nation and its political change and development. Some historians identify the growing trend towards narrow specialization in political history during recent decades: \"while a college professor in the 1940s sought to identify himself as a \"historian\", by the 1950s \"American historian\" was the designation.\" \n\nFrom the 1970s onwards, new movements challenged traditional approaches to political history. The development of social history shifted the emphasis away from the study of leaders and national decisions, and towards the role of ordinary people, especially outsiders and minorities. Younger scholars shifted to different issues, usually focused on race, class and gender, with little room for elites. After 1990 social history itself began to fade, replaced with postmodern and cultural approaches that rejected grand narrative.\n\nTraditional political history focused on major leaders and had long played a dominant role beyond academic historians in the United States. These studies accounted for about 25% of the scholarly books and articles written by American historians before 1950, and about 33% into the 1960s, followed by diplomacy. The arrival in the 1960s and 1970s of a new interest in social history led to the emergence of the \"new political history\" which saw young scholars put much more emphasis on the voters' behavior and motivation, rather than just the politicians. It relied heavily on quantitative methods to integrate social themes, especially regarding ethnicity and religion. The new social science approach was a harbinger of the fading away of interest in Great Men. The eclipse of traditional political approaches during the 1970s was a major shock, though diplomatic history fell even further. It was upstaged by social history, with a race/class/gender model. The number of political articles submitted to the Journal of American History fell by half from 33% to 15%. Patterson argued that contemporary events, especially the Vietnam War and Watergate, alienated younger scholars away from the study of politicians and their deeds. Political history never disappeared, but it never recovered its dominance among scholars, despite its sustained high popularity among the reading public. Some political historians made fun of their own predicament, as when William Leuchtenburg wrote, \"the status of the political historians within the profession has sunk to somewhere between that of a faith healer and a chiropractor. Political historians were all right in a way, but you might not want to bring one home to meet the family.\" Others were more analytical, as when Hugh Davis Graham observed:\n\nReadman (2009) discusses the historiography of British political history in the 20th century. He describes how British political scholarship mostly ignored 20th century history due to temporal proximity to the recent past, the unavailability of primary sources, and the potential for bias. The article explores how transitions in scholarship have allowed for greater interest in 20th century history among scholars, which include less reliance on archival sources, methodological changes in historiography, and the flourishing of new forms of history such as oral history. \n\nIn the course of the 1960s, however, some German historians (notably Hans-Ulrich Wehler and his cohort) began to rebel against this idea, instead suggesting a \"Primacy of Domestic Politics\" ( Primat der Innenpolitik ), in which the insecurities of (in this case German) domestic policy drove the creation of foreign policy. This led to a considerable body of work interpreting the domestic policies of various states and the ways this influenced their conduct of foreign policy.\n\nThe French Annales School had already put an emphasis on the role of geography and economics on history, and of the importance of broad, slow cycles rather than the constant apparent movement of the \"history of events\" of high politics. It downplayed politics and diplomacy. The most important work of the Annales school, Fernand Braudel 's The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II , contains a traditional Rankean diplomatic history of Philip II's Mediterranean policy, but only as the third and shortest section of a work largely focusing on the broad cycles of history in the longue durée (\"long term\"). The Annales were broadly influential, leading to a turning away from political history towards an emphasis on broader trends of economic and environmental change.\n\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, an increasing emphasis on giving a voice to the voiceless and writing the history of the underclasses, whether by using the quantitative statistical methods of social history or the more postmodern assessments of cultural history , also undermined the centrality of politics to the historical discipline. Leff noted how social historians, \"disdained political\nhistory as elitist, shallow, altogether passe, and irrelevant to the drama of everyday lives.\" \n\nMaxRange is a dataset defining level of democracy and institutional structure (regime-type) on a 100-graded scale where every value represents a unique regimetype. Values are sorted from 1-100 based on level of democracy and political accountability. MaxRange defines the value (regimetype) corresponding to all states and every month from 1789 to 2015 and updating. MaxRange is created and developed by Max Range, and is now associated with the university of Halmstad, Sweden ",
  "ZEXCS inc., ( Japanese : 有限会社ゼクシズ , Hepburn : Yūgen-gaisha Zekushizu ) is a Japanese animation studio located in Koganei, Tokyo , Japan. It was established on January 23, 1998, by former J.C.Staff producer Tomoko Kawasaki and is known for doing the animation production of series such as Sister Princess and Diabolik Lovers . Zexcs is also known for its work in cooperation with its sister company Feel .",
  "In Welsh culture , an eisteddfod [ a ] is an institution and festival with several ranked competitions, including in poetry and music. : xvi The term eisteddfod , which is formed from the Welsh morphemes : eistedd , meaning 'sit', and fod , meaning 'be', means, according to Hywel Teifi Edwards , \"sitting-together.\" Edwards further defines the earliest form of the eisteddfod as a competitive meeting between bards and minstrels , in which the winner was chosen by a noble or royal patron. \n\nThe first documented instance of such a literary festival and competition took place under the patronage of Prince Rhys ap Gruffudd of the House of Dinefwr at Cardigan Castle in 1176. However, with the Edwardian Conquest of Wales , the closing of the bardic schools, and the Anglicization of the Welsh nobility , it fell into abeyance. The current format owes much to an 18th-century revival, first patronized and overseen by the London-based Gwyneddigion Society . It was later co-opted by the Gorsedd Cymru , a secret society of poets, writers, and musicians founded by Iolo Morganwg , whose beliefs were \"a compound of Christianity and Druidism, Philosophy and Mysticism.\" : 191\n\nDespite the Druidic influences and the demonstrably fictitious nature of Iolo Morganwg's doctrines, rituals, and ceremonies, both the Gorsedd and the eisteddfod revival were embraced and spread widely by Anglican and nonconformist clergy. The revival therefore proved enormously successful and is credited as one of the primary reasons for the continued survival of the Welsh language , Welsh literature , and Welsh culture after more than eight centuries of colonialism.\n\nDuring his two 20th-century terms as Archdruid of the Gorsedd Cymru , Albert Evans-Jones , whose bardic name was Cynan and who was a war poet and minister of the Presbyterian Church of Wales , created new rituals for both the Gorsedd and the eisteddfod which are based upon the Christian beliefs of the Welsh people rather than upon Modern Druidry . After watching the initiation of Rowan Williams into the Gorsedd at the 2002 National Eisteddfod, Marcus Tanner wrote that the rituals \"seemed culled from the pages of Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings .\" : 189\n\nSince its 18th-century revival, the eisteddfod tradition has been carried all over the world by the Welsh diaspora . Today's eisteddfodau (plural form) and the National Eisteddfod of Wales in particular, are in equal parts a Renaissance fair , a Celtic festival , a musical festival , a literary festival , and \"the supreme exhibition of the Welsh culture.\" : 52\n\nIn some other countries, the term eisteddfod is used for performing arts competitions that have nothing to do with Welsh culture or the Welsh language. In other cases, however, the eisteddfod tradition has been adapted into other cultures as part of the ongoing fight to preserve endangered languages such as Irish , Cornish , Breton , Scottish Gaelic , Canadian Gaelic , Manx , Guernésiais , and Jèrriais .\n\nAs decreed by Iolo Morganwg during the late 18th century, each eisteddfod is proclaimed a year and a day prior to its opening day, by a herald from the Gorsedd Cymru . : 154\n\nThe proclamation is to read as follows, \"When the year of Our Lord ----, and the period of the Gorsedd of the Bards of Britain within the summer solstice , after summons and invitation to all to all of Wales through the Gorsedd Trumpet, under warning of a year and a day, in sight and hearing of lords and commons and in the face of the sun, the eye of light, be it known that a Gorsedd and Eisteddfod will be held at the town of ----, where protections will be afforded to all who seek privilege, dignity, and license in Poetry and Minstrelsy... And thither shall come the Archdruid and the Gorsedd and others, Bards and Licensiates of the Privilege and Robe of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, there to hold judgment of Chair and Gorsedd on Music and Poetry concerning the muse , conduct, and learning of all that may come to seek the National Eisteddfod honours, according to the privilege and customs of the Gorsedd of Bards of the Isle of Britain:\n\nAccording to Jan Morris , \"The Eisteddfod Genedlaethol flourishes as never before, having matured from cranky antiquarianism through rigid chapel respectability to a fairly pragmatic tolerance of public views and social styles. Though its competitions are confined solely to the Welsh language, and even though many Welsh-speaking writers and musicians prefer to have nothing to do with it, still it remains the Chief public expression of the Welsh culture's continued existence, the one occasion when a stranger can realize that the language is still creative, the traditions are not lost, and the loyalty of the Welsh to their origins is not dissipated. Honorary membership in the Gorsedd is still the only honour the Welsh nation can bestow upon its sons and daughters, and in a key and of back-handed symbolism, the British Government 's Secretary of State for Wales is generally invited to open the festival's proceedings (generally having to learn a few words of Welsh in order to do so). The Eisteddfod in full fig is rather like a military encampment. All its tents and pavilions are erected around a big central space, the Maes , or Field, which is usually scuffed and slippery with mud by the end of the week.\" : 155-156\n\nMorris continues, \"Most institutions of modern Wales are represented on the Maes , Gas Board to University of Wales Press, the genteel Society for the Protection of Rural Wales to the fiery Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg the Welsh Language Society . There are shops selling harps , and comic stickers, and Lol the lewd and racy student magazine, and pottery, and evangelical tracts, and lots and lots of books.\" : 156\n\nAlso according to Morris, \"the Eisteddfod is essentially competitive: there are competitions for penillion , and englynion , and male voice choirs, and poems in strict meter , and poems in free metre , and essays, and translations, and plays, and short stories.\" Also, according to Morris, \"outside the Pabell Lên , the Literary Tent, poets mutter couplets to themselves, or exchange bitter Bardic complaints.\" : 156-157\n\nHowever, the most important events at any eisteddfod are the chairing of the bard who has written the best awdl , or poem in strict meter , based on a title chosen by the judges, and the crowning of the bard who has written the best pryddest , or poem in free verse , with a similarly predetermined title.\n\nAccording to Morris, \"When Welsh poets speak of free verse , they mean forms like the sonnet or the ode , which obey the same rules as English poesy . Strict Metres verse still honours the immensely complex rules laid down for correct poetic composition 600 years ago.\" : 152\n\nDuring these ceremonies, according to Morris, \"the whole assembly seems to turn towards the Grand Pavilion, claimed to be the largest movable structure in the world. Multitudes jam its doors then, as cameras swing about its gantries, and the worthies of the Gorsedd of the Isle of Britain, robed in green, white, and blue, are unloaded from buses at its entrance.\" : 157\n\nBefore the Archdruid of the Gorsedd reveals the identity of the winning poet, the Corn Gwlad (a trumpet) blares to the east, west, north, and south to symbolically call the people together from the four corners of Wales. The Gorsedd Prayer is then recited. Flanked by his fellow members of the Gorsedd in ceremonial Neo-Druidic robes, as well as the Herald, the Recorder, and the Swordbearer, the Archdruid partially withdraws the Great Sword from its sheath three times, and asks, \" A oes heddwch ?\" ('Is there peace?'), to which the assembly replies, \" Heddwch \" ('Peace'). The Great Sword is then driven fully back into its sheath, and is never drawn again until the next eisteddfod the following year. \"Green clad elves come dancing in\", escorting a young local married woman, who presents the Horn of Plenty to the Archdruid and urges him to drink of the 'wine of welcome'. A young girl presents him with a basket of 'flowers from the land and soil of Wales' and a floral dance is performed, based on a pattern of flower gathering from the fields. : 157\n\nAccording to Morris, \"Harps play. Children sing. The tension mounts, for nobody in that immense audience yet knows who is to be the recipient of all this honour. The winning poet is somewhere among them, but first he must be found.\" : 157\n\nThe Archdruid then asks one of the judges to comment on the winning entry and explain the reasons why it was chosen. After the judge does so, the Archdruid thanks the judge for his or her, \"excellent adjudication\". The Archdruid then announces that if the poet or writer whose awdl , pryddest , or essay was submitted under a certain pen name is present, then he or she is stand up.\n\nAccording to Morris, \"the poet has really known for some time that he is the winner, but he pretends a proper astonishment anyway, and is raised faintly resisting to his feet, and out to the aisle, and away up to the platform escorted by Druids. The organ blazes a grand march, the gathering rises to its feet, the cameras whirr, and the bard is throned upon his Bardic throne, attended by elves and trumpeters and druids, in a haze of medallions, oaken wands, gleaming accoutrements and banners talismanically inscribed. Gently he is seated upon the Chair which is itself his prize, and he is proclaimed a champion: not because he won a war or a football game or even an election, but because he is judged by wise men of his nation to have composed a worthy cywydd concerning the nature of clouds.\" : 157-158\n\nTo win the chair or the crown competitions, particularly at the National Eisteddfod of Wales, grants even previously unknown poets and writers enormous publicity and prestige. The winner of the bardic chair and crown at the National Eisteddfod both receive the lifelong title prifardd ('chief-bard'). For the same poet to win both the chair and the crown at the same eisteddfod is almost unheard of, but Alan Llwyd and Donald Evans have both succeeded at doing so twice.\n\nAccording to Hywel Teifi Edwards , the ceremony of presenting the Prose Medal [ cy ] , which has been awarded since 1937, has progressively grown in importance, \"but still trails far in the wake of the Chairing and Crowning. The poet is not to be upstaged by novelist, short-story writer, autobiographer, biographer, or what have you. All attempts to transfer the Crown from poetry to prose have been forestalled, the poets rallying to the defense of what is 'rightfully' theirs with the cry of, 'What we have, we hold.'\" : 67\n\nAt the National Eisteddfod, a Gold Medal ( Welsh : Medal Aur ) is annually awarded in three categories; Fine Art, Architecture, and Craft and Design. Furthermore, the National Eisteddfod's open exhibition of art and craft, Y Lle Celf ('The Art Space') is one of the highlights of the calendar for Welsh artists. \n\nAccording to Jan Morris, \"Welsh creativity is unusually disciplined, for since the earliest times the Welsh artistic tradition has been governed by codes and conventions – perhaps since the Druids, relying as they did entirely upon their memories, drew up rules of composition to make it easier for themselves. In the Wales of the Independence the Bards and Harpers were institutionalized, with their own allotted places in society, their established functions to perform. They regarded poetry and music as professions, for the practice of which one must qualify, like a lawyer or a doctor. There were agreed measurements of value for a work of art, and the subjects of poetry were formalized, consisting at least until the fourteenth century mainly of eulogies and elegies. Musicians were restricted by intricate rules of composition. Poets were governed by the Twenty-Four Strict Metres of the classical Welsh tradition. Among the Cymry Cymraeg the Metres still prevail.\" : 152\n\nAccording to Hywel Teifi Edwards, \"The Eisteddfod, then, has evolved from a medieval testing-ground-cum-house of correction for professional Bards and Minstrels into a popular festival which annually highlights the literary scene with the aid of the Gorsedd. Lectures and discussions in Y Babell Lên , followed by reviews of the Cyfansoddiadau a Beirniadaethau in a variety of publications help to encourage a deeper and more abiding interest in Welsh literature. That 'The National' acts as a means of heightening an awareness of language and literature as humanizing forces which no society can neglect with impunity is not too large a claim to make for it.\" : 73\n\nAlso according to Morris, \"literature is the first Welsh glory, poetry its apotheosis , and the company of poets is the nobility of this nation.\" : 161\n\nAccording to Edwards, there is a legend that the first eisteddfod took place at the royal behest of Maelgwn Gwynedd at Conwy during the 6th century. It was Maelgwn's wish that the assembled bards and minstrels would compete against each other. First, however, Maelgwn decreed that they must all swim the River Conwy first and that the minstrels must do so carrying the harps on their backs. For this reason, the bards, whom Maelgwn favoured, ended up winning the contest. : 3\n\nAccording to legend, Gruffudd ap Cynan (1055–1137), the Dublin -born King of Gwynedd from the House of Aberffraw and the descendant of Rhodri Mawr , Sigtrygg Silkbeard , and Brian Boru , not only reformed the Welsh bardic schools to accord with those that trained the Irish language bards, but also served as patron to an eisteddfod at Caerwys during his reign. : 9\n\nThe first documented eisteddfod was hosted by Rhys ap Gruffydd , the grandson of Gruffudd ap Cynan through the maternal line and monarch of Deheubarth through his paternal descent from the House of Dinefwr , at Cardigan Castle on Christmas Day, 1176. According to Hywel Teifi Edwards, what few details are recorded of the event in the Brut y Tywysogion , \"encourage the view that it could not have been the first of its kind.\" : 6\n\nRhys awarded two chairs as prizes, one for the winner of the poetry competition and the other for music. The bardic chair went to a poet from Gwynedd , while the musical chair went to the son of Eilon the Crythwr, a member of Rhys's court. Armchairs were a valuable asset, normally reserved for people of high status. \n\nIn 2007, Welsh historian Roger Turvey, writing of Dinefwr Castle , suggested that The Lord Rhys' idea for a competitive festival of music and poetry at Cardigan Castle may have been inspired by similar contests in other parts of Catholic Europe . In those other countries, aspiring poets were trained through apprenticeship to master craftsmen or by attending schools run by poets' guilds such as the Puy of France, the Meistersingers of the Holy Roman Empire , or the Rederijkerskamers of the Netherlands , all of which also organized eisteddfod-like contests between poets on patronal feast days of the Roman Catholic liturgical year . The Lord Rhys, Turvey suggested, may have learned about the Puy tradition from the Cambro-Normans in the Welsh Marches or from Welsh mercenary soldiers returning from France. \n\nWhen asked about Turvey's theory, recognized eisteddfod historian Hywel Teifi Edwards said, \"It's conjecture, but there's no doubt that there was a bardic tradition of competition for status before this time.\" Edwards further stated that any foreign influence was an indication of how very cosmopolitan Medieval Wales had been. \"It's a sign of a healthy culture to accept – and marry with – other cultures,\" he added. \n\nThe next large-scale eisteddfod that is historically known is the three-month-long 1450 eisteddfod at Carmarthen Castle under Gruffudd ap Nicolas . At the eisteddfod the Cadair Arian ('Silver Chair'), which is said to have been fashioned by Gruffudd ap Nicolas himself, was won by a cywydd in honour of the Holy Trinity composed by Dafydd ab Edmwnd , a Welsh poet who did not depend on noble patronage, from Hanmer , Flintshire. : 6-8 Welsh poet and Roman Catholic priest Llawdden , however, accused Gruffudd ap Nicolas of accepting a bribe from Dafydd ab Edmwnd in return for the Silver Chair. \n\nDafydd ab Edmwnd's cywydd exemplified the 24 strict metres of Welsh poetry , previously codified by Einion Offeiriad and Dafydd Ddu o Hiraddug , as Dafydd ab Edmwnd had personally reformed them. He deleted two metres and replaced them with the more complicated Gorchest y Beirdd and the Cadwynfyr .\n\nThe reform of the 24 metres presented by Dafydd was formally accepted at the 1450 Carmarthen eisteddfod and was widely adopted by bards throughout Wales. The consequence of Dafydd's reforms was that greater emphasis was placed by the bardic elite upon adhering to the stricter metres rather than to the theme or content of their poetry.\n\nUntil this time, the training of Welsh poets had always been a secret, with the craft handed down from teacher to apprentice, but, as the poetry of the professional bards became increasingly incomprehensible, less complex and more popularly oriented works of Welsh poetry began to be composed by bards with humbler origins and less formal training.\n\nAccording to John Davies , a team of researchers led by Dafydd Bowen has demonstrated that the Welsh bards of the 15th century were completely dependent upon the Welsh nobility and the monks and abbots of monasteries such as Strata Florida and Valle Crucis Abbey for both hospitality and patronage in return for praise poetry . Davies adds, however, that, \"in a notable article\", Welsh nationalist and traditional Catholic writer Saunders Lewis argued that the Welsh bards of the era, \"were expressing in their poetry a love for a stable, deep-rooted civilization.\" Lewis added that the bards \"were the leading upholders of the belief that a hierarchical social structure, 'the heritage and tradition of an ancient aristocracy', were the necessary precondition of civilized life and that there were deep philosophical roots to this belief.\" \n\nThe next eisteddfod that is historically documented is the 1451 Carmarthen eisteddfod. \n\nIn 1523, an eisteddfod was held at Caerwys under King Henry VIII 's charter and was led by Welsh bard and future Franciscan friar , Tudur Aled . At the urging of the aristocratic Mostyn family of Talacre Hall, a Statute, which was attributed to King Gruffydd ap Cynan of Gwynedd , was used as the basis for the eisteddfod. The Statute listed the rights of bards in Welsh culture and under traditional Welsh law , while also arguing that bards should not drink to excess, womanize, or gamble. : 8–10 In addition, the Statute further stated that a true bard must never write satirical poetry : 28–29 and codified the rules of praise poetry at a time when the Welsh bardic tradition of was increasingly under threat and, \"demanded that the bard celebrate in elevated language the orderliness of a God-centered world.\" : 8–10\n\nQueen Elizabeth I of England commanded that Welsh bards be examined and licensed by officials of the Crown, who had alleged that those whom they considered genuine bards were, \"much discouraged to travail in the exercise and practice of their knowledge and also not a little hindered in their living and preferments.\" : 10 Unlicensed bards, according to Hywel Teifi Edwards, \"would be put to some honest work.\" Although Edwards has compared the unlicensed bards of the era with, \"today's abusers of the Social security system,\" : 8–10 historian Philip Caraman quotes a 1575 \"Report on Wales\" that reveals an additional reason for the decree. During the Queen's ongoing religious persecution of the Catholic Church in England and Wales , many Welsh Pencerddau ('head bards') were, according to the report, acting as the secret emissaries of Recusants in the Welsh nobility and were helping those nobles spread the news about secret Catholic masses and pilgrimages . \n\nThis was no idle claim. When Welsh Recusant, schoolmaster, and unlicensed bard Richard Gwyn was put on trial for high treason before a panel of judges headed by the Chief Justice of Chester , Sir George Bromley , at Wrexham in 1583, Gwyn stood accused of refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy , denying the Queen's claim to be Supreme Head of the Church of England , of involvement in the local Catholic underground, but also of composing satirical poetry aimed at the established church and reciting, \"certain rhymes of his own making against married priests and ministers.\" Gwyn was found guilty and condemned to death by hanging, drawing and quartering . The sentence was carried out in the Beast Market in Wrexham on 15 October 1584. Just before Gwyn was hanged he turned to the crowd and said, \"I have been a jesting fellow, and if I have offended any that way, or by my songs, I beseech them for God's sake to forgive me.\" The hangman pulled at Gwyn's leg irons hoping to put him out of his pain. When he appeared dead they cut him down, but he revived and remained conscious through the disembowelling, until his head was severed. His last words, in Welsh, were reportedly \" Iesu, trugarha wrthyf \" ('Jesus, have mercy on me').\n\nRichard Gwyn was canonised by Pope Paul VI in 1970 as one of the Forty Martyrs of England and Wales . His feast day is celebrated on 17 October. Following Catholic Emancipation in 1829, six works of Christian poetry in the Welsh language by Richard Gwyn, five carols and a satirical Cywydd composed in Wrexham Gaol following the assassination of Dutch Revolt leader William the Silent by Balthasar Gérard , were discovered and published. Similar Welsh poetry in strict metre survives from other Recusant Bards of the era, such as Robert Gwin , Catrin ferch Gruffudd ap Hywel , and Gruffydd Robert .\n\nDespite their battles being so similar to his own against government censorship, Sir Philip Sidney , in An Apology for Poetry , expressed both admiration for and envy of the prestige that poets enjoyed in Welsh culture , which he contrasted with what he described as the Elizabethan era tendency in English culture to treat poets as unwanted stepchildren, \"In Wales, the true remnant of the ancient Brittons, as there are good authorities to show, the long time they had poets which they called Bards: so through all the conquests of Romans , Saxons , Danes , and Normans , some of whom, did seek to ruin all memory of learning from among them, yet do their poets even to this day last: so as it is not more notable in the soon beginning, then in long continuing.\"\n\nLikely due to the continued existence of Recusant Bards, the 1567 and 1568 Caerwys eisteddfodau were patronized by the Queen, so that, \"all or every person or persons that intend to maintain their living by name or colour of Minstrelsy, rhymers, or bards... shall.. shew their learning thereby\", : 192 and overseen by the officials of her Council of Wales and the Marches . : 8–10 By royal decree, only Welsh bards licensed by the officials of the Queen were permitted to compete.\n\nAt the eisteddfod held in Caerwys in 1568, the prizes awarded were a miniature silver chair to the winning poet, a little silver crwth to the winning fiddler, a silver tongue to the best singer, and a tiny silver harp to the best harpist. The chief chaired bard of the event was Robert Davies (from Nant-glyn ) and the second being \" Twm o'r Nant \".\n\nThe official Anglican translation of the Bible into the Welsh language , which continues to have an enormous influence on the Welsh poetry submitted to the eisteddfodau, saw its first publication in 1588. The translator, Reverend William Morgan , was a Cambridge graduate and later became Anglican Bishop of Llandaff and St Asaph . He based his Biblical translation on the Hebrew and Greek original Bibles, while also consulting the English Bishops ' and Geneva translations. Y Beibl cyssegr-lan , as it was called, also included original translations as well as adaptations of William Salesbury 's Welsh New Testament . No other book in the Welsh language has been anywhere near as influential in linguistic or literary terms. Bishop Morgan skillfully moulded the Middle Welsh literary language of the medieval bards ( Yr Heniaith , or 'the old language') into the Elizabethan-era Cymraeg Llenyddol ('literary Welsh') still in use today. Even though there is a major difference between Cymraeg Llenyddol and all 21st century spoken dialects of the Welsh language, eisteddfod submissions are still required to be composed in the literary language of Bishop Morgan's Bible, which remains the foundation upon which all subsequent Welsh literature has been built.\n\nAccording to Marcus Tanner, Queen Elizabeth I's experiment at royal patronage of the eisteddfod did not catch on and, as the 16th and 17th centuries progressed, the Welsh nobility became increasingly Anglicized and ceased to grant employment or hospitality to Welsh-language poets. Although eisteddfodau continued, the gatherings became more informal; Welsh poets would often meet in taverns, cemeteries, or inns to have \"assemblies of rhymers\". : 192 But the interest of the Welsh people dwindled to such a point that the eisteddfod held at Glamorgan in 1620 attracted an audience of only four people. : 192 The winners, however, continued to receive a chair, which was a highly prized award because of its perceived social status.\n\nThroughout the medieval period, high-backed chairs with arm rests were reserved for royalty and high-status leaders in military, religious, or political affairs. As most ordinary people sat on stools until the 1700s, the award of an armchair immediately changed the social class of a winning bard.\n\nIn 1701, an eisteddfod was held at Machynlleth in order, \"To begin to renew the eisteddfod of bards (as they were in olden times), to reprimand false cynghanedd , to explain the difficult things, and to confirm what is correct in the art of poetry in the Welsh language.\" : 12\n\nThe 1701 eisteddfod was followed, according to Edwards, by a series of Eisteddfodau'r Almaciau , so called because they were widely advertised in the cheap almanacs that were widely available. The englynion and cywyddau composed for these events \"owe more to the beery atmosphere at which they were composed than to genuine inspiration and craft.\" : 12\n\nIn 1734, Siôn Rhydderch organized an eisteddfod adjudicated by a panel of 12 judges at Dolgellau , but upon his arrival there was greeted by only six poets, \"and all the signs of apathy and dejection.\" : 13\n\nComparing this disappointing response to what he saw as the glory of the Elizabethan-era eisteddfodau at Caerwys, Rhydderch vowed that he would have no role in further efforts to revive the tradition, \"unless some others may feel like restarting and setting up the thing. And if it will be like that, if I am alive and well, I shall not be hindered from coming to that.\" : 13\n\nIn 1788, Thomas Jones and Jonathan Hughes asked the London-based Gwyneddigion Society to donate, \"some small present out of goodwill to those who are trying to crawl after their mother tongue.\" : 13\n\nAlthough the Gwyneddigion Society agreed, they laid down certain conditions to their support that permanently altered the future course of the eisteddfod and its traditions. The Gwyneddigion claimed for themselves the right to proclaim both the eisteddfod and the theme of the main competition which they alone would set, one year in advance. The poems were to be submitted under pseudonyms and would be adjudicated solely upon their literary merits. The poems and the adjudicator's comments would then be forwarded to the eisteddfod in a sealed package. The adjudicators were to be able men for the job and were to choose the winning entry based upon \"purity of language and regular composition of the poems to be among their chief merits.\" : 13–14\n\nThe adjudicators were to meet together and give an impartial decision and, in the event of any disagreement, the Gwyneddigion would endeavor to resolve the dispute. The name of the winning poet would be announced upon the first day of the eisteddfod and, owing to the dignity of his status as Pencerdd , the winner was not to compete alongside the other poets in the composition of impromptu verse. : 14\n\nIn so doing, the Gwyneddigion laid down the framework for the modern National Eisteddfod of Wales . According to Hywel Teifi Edwards, \"there was to be notice given a year in advance of one organized, annual eisteddfod answerable to a central, controlling authority which would require competitors to submit their compositions pseudonymously to a panel of competent adjudicators.\" : 14\n\nAlthough the Gwyneddigion did not succeed in their ambition of transforming the eisteddfod \"into an Academy that would act as a forcing house for Welsh culture\", they have wielded considerable influence over continued requirement for long poems as eisteddfod submissions. : 14 Furthermore, in reaction to the incomprehensibility of Welsh poetry composed in strict meter , the Gwyneddigion held up the recent poetry of Reverend Goronwy Owen as a better model. : 14–15\n\nLong before his death on his tobacco and cotton plantation near Lawrenceville, Virginia in 1769, Owen had often expressed the desire to compose an epic work of Christian poetry which would be the equal of John Milton 's Paradise Lost . Owen felt, however, that the rules of Welsh poetry in strict meter prevented him from doing so. : 14–15 Therefore, by holding Owen up as a model, the Gwyneddigion ensured that his literary legacy is that, as late as 1930, both the adjudicators and the poets composing submissions to the National Eisteddfod of Wales were aspiring to produce the Welsh national epic that Owen had longed to write in vain. : 29–31\n\nThe first eisteddfod of the revival, for which \"Thomas Jones simply used\" the name of the Gwyneddigion \"for promotional purposes\", was held at Corwen in May 1789. Gwallter Mechain was judged the winner, having illegally been informed in advance by Thomas Jones of the subjects for the impromptu poetry contests. Despite outraged complaints by Gwallter Mechain's competitors, the Gwyneddigion upheld the judges' decision. : 15–16\n\nThe first eisteddfod held in full accordance with the Gwyneddigion Society's new rules was held at Bala in September 1789. The awdlau that were submitted for the bardic chair were on the theme Istyriaethar Oes Dyn ('A Consideration of Man's Life') and, according to Edwards, \"heralded the appearance of the new awdl .\" : 15\n\nAccording to Hywel Teifi Edwards, while the awarding of a chair is a very old tradition, the now-familiar ceremony of the chairing of the bard who has composed the best awdl dates from the eisteddfod revival of the early 1790s. : 15\n\nDuring the 1790 eisteddfod held at St. Asaph , Gwyneddigion Society member Edward Williams, whose bardic name was Iolo Morganwg, became convinced that he and his fellow Welsh poets were the descendants of the Druids and that the eisteddfod was a survival of Druidic ritual. In response, Iolo Morganwg, according to Marcus Tanner, \"reintroduced what he considered the ritual of an ancient Bardic congress to a series of rather ordinary literary proceedings conducted chiefly in hotels.\" : 192\n\nTo accomplish this end, in 1792 Iolo Morganwg founded a secret society of Welsh poets, which he dubbed Gorsedd Beirdd Ynys Prydain . Morganwg also invented its structure and rituals, for which he drew upon on a mixture of Freemasonry , Welsh mythology , modern Druidry, and some Christian elements . Morganwg alleged, however, that the Gorsedd was a survival from pre-Christian Wales. The fictitious origin of Morganwg's claims and of the Gorsedd's ceremonies were firmly established only in the 20th century by Professor G.J. Williams. \n\nIn October 1792, The Gentleman's Magazine reported, \"This being the day on which the autumnal equinox occurred, some Welsh bards resident in London assembled in congress on Primrose Hill , according to ancient usage... A circle of stones formed, in the middle of which was the Maan Gorsedd, or altar, on which a naked sword being placed, all the Bards assisted to sheathe it. This ceremony was attended with a proclamation, the substance of which was that the Bards of the Isles of Britain (for such is their ancient name) were the heralds and ministers of peace.\" : 190-191\n\nIn 1814, an observer caught sight of Iolo Morganwg walking behind a banner at Pontypridd , \"at the head of a procession... over the great bridge and then over to the Rocking Stone on the common above. Ancient ceremonies were performed on the great stone by Iolo in the role of Y Gwyddon , or Odin , the Archdruid , not the least being the sheathing the State Sword of Wales to convey the valuable lesson, as in Gethsemane , that there is more credit in sheathing the sabre than in drawing it forth among the sons of men.\" : 191\n\nThe eisteddfod revival, however, was briefly brought to a halt by the Napoleonic Wars , but was again restarted following the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. : 16\n\nThe earliest known surviving bardic chair made specifically for an eisteddfod was constructed in 1819. Iolo Morganwg and the Gorsedd made their first appearance at the same eisteddfod, which was held at the Ivy Bush Inn at Carmarthen in 1819, and its close association with the festival has continued since then.\n\nAlso at the 1819 Carmarthen eisteddfod, Iolo Morganwg presented a freer code of meters. While still defending the superiority of cynghanedd , Morganwg said this had also been used in Gwent and Glamorgan for centuries prior to Dafydd ab Edmwnd 's 15th century reforms. This led, after considerable debate between traditionalists and innovators, to the adoption of the eisteddfod contest for best pryddest and the ceremony of the crowning of the bard. : 18\n\nMeanwhile, Archdeacon Thomas Beynon , the president of the Carmarthen Cymreigyddion Society and a staunch patron of the provincial eisteddfodau, was persistently urging for the adoption of blank verse , or unrhymed iambic pentameter , as another alternative to Welsh poetry in strict meter . : 19\n\nMeanwhile, all poems submitted to eisteddfodau began being published in 1822, which allowed for the first time for the Welsh people to read the poems and to decide for themselves about their merits and flaws. : 18\n\nAt the 1824 National Eisteddfod in Powys , satirical poetry in the traditional englyn form was submitted under the pre-announced title \"Beddargraff Dic Siôn Dafydd\" (\"The Epitaph of Dic Siôn Dafydd \"). \n\nAccording to Hywel Teifi Edwards , \"Ten 'Provincial Eisteddfodau' were held between 1819 and 1834, eisteddfodau on a scale never witnessed before. They were patronized by Anglicized gentry and graced by royalty when George IV 's brother, the Duke of Sussex , appeared at Denbigh in 1828 to be followed at Beaumaris in 1832 by the young Princess Victoria and her mother .\" : 17\n\nFollowing the 1847 attack by the Blue Books against the moral character of the Welsh people , Welsh poetry composed for the eisteddfodau \"found itself trapped within the part allotted the Welsh language in the counterattack against the Blue Books.\" For this reason, much of the poetry written sought to promote an image of the Welsh people as \"God-fearing, Queen -loving\", and, \" Empire -supporting.\" : 27\n\nAt the 1850 Rhuddlan Royal Eisteddfod, £25 and a Chair Medallion were offered for the best Pryddestawd on the theme Yr Adgyfodiad ('the Resurrection'). The poets were allowed to choose the meter, excluding blank verse, that best suited them. Caledfryn submitted an awdl , while Eben Fardd and Evan Evans (Ieuan Glan Geirionydd) submitted Alexandrine Pryddestau . In a judgment unheard-of in Eisteddfod history: Ieuan Glan Gerionydd's Alexandrine Pryddest was judged superior and was awarded the £25 and Chair Medallion over Caledfryn's Awdl in strict metre . : 19\n\nUpon the publication of all the Eisteddfod's submissions, however, Eben Fardd's attempt at an epic work of Christian poetry was \"hailed by the literati as a work of distinction far surpassing the pallid, common-sense poem written by Ieuan Glan Gerionydd\". : 20 As Eben Fardd's Pryddest had been relegated to third place by the judges, it was widely felt that something was seriously wrong with adjudication standards and \"talk of eisteddfod reform was in the air.\" : 20\n\nIn 1858 John Williams , whose bardic name was Ab Ithel , held a \"national\" eisteddfod with the Gorsedd Cymru in Llangollen . \"The great Llangollen Eisteddfod of 1858\" proved highly significant for several reasons. For example, John Williams (the event's organiser), offered £20 and a Silver Star for the best essay on the theme, The Discovery of America in the 12th-century by Prince Madoc ab Owain Gwynedd . This was, according to Hywel Teifi Edwards, a subject inspired by Iolo Morganwg. : 20-21\n\nInstead, Welsh historian Thomas Stephens submitted an essay that, in what Edwards has described, as a \"scholarly tour de force, demolished the cherished myth\". In response, Ab Ithel decreed, \"that the essay broke with the spirit of the competition\", and would not be awarded the prize. In response, a scandalized crowd followed Stephens into the Cambrian Tent, where he read his essay aloud before them despite Ab Ithel's efforts to drown him out with a convenient brass band. Despite having been denied the prize, Stephens succeeded in persuading his audience that Prince Madoc did not in fact discover the New World. : 21\n\nThe Llangollen eisteddfod also saw the first public appearance of John Ceiriog Hughes , who won a prize for the love poem , Myfanwy Fychan of Dinas Brân , which contradicts the Blue Books by describing a virtuous Welsh woman. As may be expected, the song became an instant hit. : 32-33 This eisteddfod outraged the English-language press. The Daily Telegraph called it \"a national debauch of sentimentality\". A writer for The Times went even farther, calling the eisteddfod \"simply foolish interference with the natural progress of civilization and prosperity – it is a monstrous folly to encourage the Welsh in a loving fondness for their old language.\" : 155\n\nBefore the 1858 Llangollen eisteddfod was over, however, a meeting of Welsh literati had taken place and decided that an annual national eisteddfod, conducted with due regard for standards, was long overdue. Yr Eisteddfod , a national body guided by an elected council, was formed and the Gorsedd subsequently merged with it. The Gorsedd holds the right of proclamation and of governance while the council organizes the event. The first true National Eisteddfod organized by the council was held in Aberdare in 1861 on a pattern that continues to the present day. : 21\n\nAccording to Hywel Teifi Edwards, \"The 1860s found the eisteddfod poet beset with doubt, as the words of Eben Fardd and Talhaiarn ( John Jones 1810–69), two of the foremost poets of the time, prove. Both accepted the subservience of their mother tongue and the diminished role of the poet in the steam age . If poetry per se was of questionable value, how much more so Welsh poetry, and strict meter poetry at that? What could be less marketable in an age that marketed English was with progress than Welsh poetry? It was galling when Fleet Street taunted Wales with its want of a Shakespeare , a Milton , a Wordsworth or a Tennyson . It was shattering when Matthew Arnold , scourge of philistinism and hawker of Celtic magic, insisted that any Welsh poet with anything worth saying should say it in English. Edward Dafydd , in 1655 , expressed the sense of desolation he felt as he pondered the passing of the old order and the coming of a bleak age: Nid yw'r bid hwn gyda'r beirdd ('This world is not for poets.') He could well have been speaking for the poets of the 1860s.\" : 25–26\n\nAlso during the Victorian era , the poets who won the chair or the crown at the National Eisteddfod were praised to a degree that subsequent literary critics and historians have found not only excessive, but \"ludicrous\". According to Edwards, however, \"It is easy to laugh at the besotted rhetoric of the period, but let us remember how starved of respect Welsh literature was for most of the time and how marginal was the role allotted to most writers. The Eisteddfod, with its huge audience, offered both glory and economic reward. It is perfectly natural, given the circumstances, that the accolade 'National Winner' should be surrounded with so much hype and sought after so frantically.\" : 73\n\nPerhaps for these reasons, during the late 19th century, according to Edwards, \"Wales still pursued 'the one poem' that alone, the Renaissance had taught, justified a literature's claim to greatness.\" : 30\n\nThe Welsh poet Lewis William Lewis (1831–1901), whose bardic name was Llew Llwyfo, repeatedly attempted in his eisteddfod submissions to, \"achieve the national epic that would merit translation into the major literatures\". He chose subjects such as Caractacus , the Arthurian legend , Llewellyn the Last , and even the Old Testament King David . Although Edwards is very critical of Llew Llwyfo and accuses him of following the then common practice of imitating Victorian-era English poetry , : 30-31 Lewis' poetry repeatedly won first prize at multiple eisteddfodau held both in Wales and within Welsh-American immigrant communities. \n\nTragically, however, \"a Welsh epic refused to materialize. A succession of aspirants rifled the works of authorities from Homer to Bulwer-Lytton in the hope of hitting upon a formula that would take.\" : 30\n\nAccording to Jan Morris, \"By the end of the century, Hubert Herkomer , one of the most fashionable painters of his day, had created for [the Gorsedd]'s functionaries gloriously neo-Druidical robes and insignia of gold, velvet, and ermine (the Archdruid 's breastplate was designed to choke him, Herkomer said, if he gave a false judgement).\" : 155\n\nEven though the title had been previously chosen by the eisteddfod judges, almost certainly in the hope of inspiring a Welsh equivalent to Lord Tennyson 's Idylls of the King , Thomas Gwynn Jones ' hugely influential awdl , Ymadawiad Arthur (\"The Passing of Arthur\") won its author the bardic chair at the National Eisteddfod in 1902.\n\nThe poem, according to Hywel Teifi Edwards, \"brought back some of the mythopoeic grandeur which John Morris-Jones yearned for. More than that, he made of Bedwyr , the knight charged by Arthur to throw the great sword Excalibur into the lake, a prototype of the twentieth-century Welshman who, from generation to generation, armed only with a vision of his culture's worth, fights for its survival against an all-devouring materialism. Bedwyr, agonizing over the catastrophe which he feared would befall his defenseless country should he obey Arthur's command, is one of the most deeply moving figures in Welsh literature. Denied the security of a matchless weapon, the last tangible proof of Arthur's supernatural strength, he must fight on with only his faith in Arthur's promised return from Afalon to sustain him.\" : 50-51\n\nUnlike the many works of English, French , and German poetry inspired by the Arthurian legend , Ymadawiad Arthur makes frequent references to Welsh literature and the Welsh mythology of the Mabinogion , and is believed to derive its narrative flow from Jones's careful study of that same source. William Beynon Davies further considers Ymadawiad Arthur a work of subtly Christian poetry based on its many Biblical parallels, as King Arthur resembles in some ways the Messiah and in others the Suffering Servant . \n\nThomas Gwynn Jones has been called the greatest master of Welsh poetry in strict meter since the 15th century and, in Ymadawiad Arthur , according to one critic, the cynghanedd \"is so smooth and natural that often we deem it accidental\". It is well documented, however, that Jones carefully studied medieval cywyddau , and the verse technique of Ymadawiad Arthur benefited substantially from this study. The poem is also notable for Jones' revival of many words from Medieval Welsh , Jones being an influential exponent of what he called Rhin yr Heniaith (\"The Virtue of the Old Language\"). \n\nIn 1905, Thomas Marchant Williams was knighted by King Edward VII for his part in the revival of the Cymmrodorion Society and the establishment of the National Eisteddfod Association.\n\nDuring the 1912 National Eisteddfod at Wrexham , T.H. Parry-Williams achieved for the first time the almost unheard of feat of winning both the chair and the crown. Parry-Williams later recalled returning home to Rhyd-ddu , where had been working as a hired hand on the farm of a relative. Upon telling his employer of his double victory, Parry-Williams was advised to \"seek grace\". When Parry-Williams then informed his employer that both victories had gained him £40, the relative shouted in angry disbelief, \" Ac mi gwnest nhw i gyd ar dy din !!! \" ('And you did them all sitting on your arse!!!') : 76-77\n\nOne of the most dramatic events in the 900-year history of the eisteddfod took place on 6 September 1917, during World War I . It was the award of the bardic chair during the second day of the 1917 National Eisteddfod of Wales at Birkenhead Park in the English town of the same name. The three adjudicators in the chair competition agreed unanimously that the best awdl by far on the set theme Yr Arwr ('The Hero') had been submitted under the pseudonym Fleur-de-lis . The bard was then summoned three times by the Archdruid Dyfed to stand up, in vain. The Archdruid then announced that the poet who submitted the winning awdl had died during the short time between mailing his submission and the date of the eisteddfod. His name was Private Ellis Humphrey Evans , whose bardic name was Hedd Wyn ('Blessed Peace'), of the 15th Battalion, Royal Welch Fusiliers , and he had fallen during the trench warfare , \"somewhere in France\". The bardic chair was covered with a black sheet and, according to newspaper reports, \"there wasn't a dry eye in the pavilion .\" Ever since, the 1917 National Eisteddfod of Wales has been referred to as \" Eisteddfod y Gadair Ddu \" ('The Eisteddfod of the Black Chair'). According to Jan Morris, \"Hedd Wyn became a legend, a symbol, and an inspiration to other poets. 'The Black Chair of Birkenhead' was taken sadly home to Gwynedd , to be placed with the other trophies of Hedd Wyn's short life in the family farm above the Bala road, and there we may visit it still. It has never been forgotten. A constant stream of visitors, patriots, poets, groups of schoolchildren, winds its way up the long farm drive, in the lee of the hills, to the old house among its clumped trees. It stands there all alone looking out magnificently over bare hills to the ramparts of Eryri in the distance – the very epitome of a Welsh view, all grandeur tinged with melancholy. The Black Chair is kept in a sort of shrine-room, dim-lit and cluttered. Around it three or four other eisteddfod chairs stand in attendance, like sacred stools in an Ashanti temple...\" : 161\n\nEvans lies buried at Artillery Wood Cemetery, near Boezinge , Belgium. After the Armistice , a petition was submitted to the Imperial War Graves Commission and his headstone was given the additional words Y Prifardd Hedd Wyn ('The Chief Bard, Hedd Wyn').\n\nIn the 1921 National Eisteddfod at Caernarfon , Reverend Albert Evans-Jones (Cynan) won the bardic crown for his pryddest , Mab y Bwthyn (\"the Cottage Lad\"). Cynan was a native of Pwllheli and had served in the RAMC during World War I . Cynan drew for his winning pryddest upon both the poetry of John Masefield and upon his own experiences in the Macedonian front and in the trenches of France. Mab y Bwthyn \"tells, in a gushingly romantic, lyrical style how a young gwerinwr , scarred by the horrors of war, turns from the fetid city to seek spiritual renewal in the natural beauty of his home and the love of a pure country girl.\" Cynan's poem has been called the best-loved pryddest ever composed during the 20th century and many Welsh people , according to Hywel Teifi Edwards , are still able to recite long passages of it from memory. : 59-60 Alan Llwyd , who has translated part of Mab y Bwthyn into English for the 2008 book Out of the Fire of Hell: Welsh Experience of the Great War 1914–1918 in Prose and Verse , has argued that Cynan, rather than the far more famous Hedd Wyn , is the greatest Welsh war poet .\n\nPlaid Cymru , a Welsh nationalist and social democratic political party, was founded during the 1925 National Eisteddfod at Pwllheli, Gwynedd. Inspired by the recent Irish War of Independence , Saunders Lewis , Huw Robert Jones , Lewis Valentine , Moses Griffith, Fred Jones and D. Edmund Williams met in a café called Maes Gwyn with the aim of establishing a \"Welsh party\". During the meeting, they founded Plaid Genedlaethol Cymru (\"National Party of Wales\"), on 5 August 1925. The principal aim of the party would be to foster a Welsh-speaking Wales. To this end it was agreed that party business be conducted in Welsh, and that members must sever all links with other British political parties. Saunders Lewis insisted upon these principles before he would agree to the Pwllheli conference.\n\nAt the 1936 National Eisteddfod held at Fishguard ( Welsh : Abergwaun ), the set title for the Bardic Crown was Yr Anialwch ('The Wasteland'), which was almost certainly inspired by T.S. Eliot 's famous Modernist poem of the same name . Instead of copying Eliot, however, Welsh poet David Jones (of the bardic name, Dwst y Garreg , transl. 'the desert', or lit., 'stone dust' ) of Cilfynydd won the Crown with a pryddest about black lung disease and the damage it was wreaking upon the coal-mining communities in the South Wales valleys . : 60\n\nReverend Albert Evans-Jones (Cynan) served a term as the Recorder of the Gorsedd Cymru in 1935, and another as joint-secretary of the National Eisteddfod Council in 1937.\n\nAccording to Hywel Teifi Edwards, \"The Second World War , which plumbed new depths of bestiality culminating in the atomic bomb , put the fear of national extinction in a world-wide context. The Welsh, fighting a long battle for cultural survival, found themselves subsumed, as it were, in a universal army. The cry that went up after Nagasaki and Hiroshima , We are all survivors now! , was easily understood by Welsh writers. At that point, the age-old fight to perpetuate a culture steeped in the Christian tradition was more clearly discerned as the crazy militarism of the superpowers moved the world ever nearer to the abyss. The loss of Welshness now, far from being a sign of progress , would merely conduce to the spread of the uniformity of mind so beloved of totalitarians everywhere. Such a conviction has served to intensify the fight for the language, for to lose would be to ease the path of those forces that threaten the whole of mankind.\" : 62\n\nIn response to the 1961 census, which showed a radical decrease in the percentage of Welsh speakers, Saunders Lewis gave the famous 1962 radio address Tynged yr iaith ('The Fate of the Language') in which he predicted the imminent extinction of the Welsh language unless immediate action was taken. Lewis hoped to motivate Plaid Cymru into directly fighting for the language. Instead, his address led to the 1962 foundation of Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg ( The Welsh Language Society ) at a Plaid Cymru summer school held in Pontardawe in Glamorgan . \n\nIt has been said that, \"of all the memorable phrases coined in the twentieth century none has greater resonance for the Welsh speaker than Tynged yr Iaith . . . which still haunts or inspires champions of the native tongue on the cusp of the new millennium\". In 1985, the long-term effects of Saunders Lewis' Tynged yr Iaith were listed by Gwyn Williams: the formation of Cymdeithas yr Iaith Gymraeg in 1962, direct action against English-language offices, roadsigns, and TV masts, sit-ins and demonstrations, Welsh-language schools , the 1973 adoption of adult education in the Welsh language based upon the Ulpan system created in the State of Israel for teaching the Hebrew language and Israeli culture to adult immigrants, the 1964 creation of the office of Secretary of State for Wales , the 1967 passing of the Welsh Language Act , the creation of S4C , and the mushrooming of Welsh-language publishing, film production, pop and rock , as well as youth and urban music.\n\nReverend Albert Evans-Jones (Cynan) served as Archdruid twice and is the only person ever to have been elected to that position for a second term. His two terms were from 1950 to 1954 and from 1963 to 1966. He was also the first Archdruid to accept that the Gorsedd is an 18th-century invention by Iolo Morganwg and that it has no links to Welsh mythology or to the ancient Druids, thus healing rifts between the academic and ecclesiastical establishments and the eisteddfod movement.\n\nCynan is also responsible for designing the modern ceremonies of the crowning and chairing of the bard in the eisteddfod as they are now performed, by creating ceremonies which, he thought, better reflected the Christian beliefs of the Welsh people. \n\nIn 1969, Cynan was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II as part of the honours at the Investiture of the Prince of Wales for Cynan's services to both Welsh culture and literature. He remains the only Archdruid ever to have been so honoured. \n\nAlthough it has been held since 1929, the most notable event in the history of the Welsh youth festival known as the Urdd National Eisteddfod took place at Aberystwyth , also in 1969. Charles, Prince of Wales was invited, so giving him a public platform from which to address the crowd. It was the same year as his investiture as Prince of Wales , which had outraged many Welsh nationalists , particularly those with leanings towards republicanism . For this reason, as the Prince arrived on stage, more than one hundred people stood up and walked out in protest. The fallout afterwards was heated and an editorial in the Welsh-language newspaper Y Cymro severely angered the director of the Urdd National Eisteddfod. \n\nIn a parallel with the simultaneous literary movement known as New Formalism in American poetry , the late 20th century witnessed a renaissance in Welsh poetry composed in strict meter, especially englynion and cywyddau . This renaissance is largely inspired by the poetry of Alan Llwyd . Llwyd, a native of Dolgellau , Gwynedd, first came to prominence with the almost unheard of feat of winning both the chair and the crown at the 1973 National Eisteddfod and then repeating the same feat in 1976.\n\nThe 1982 bardic chair was awarded to Gerallt Lloyd Owen for the awdl Cilmeri , which Hywel Teifi Edwards has called the only 20th-century awdl , that matches T. Gwynn Jones ' 1902 masterpiece Umadawiad Arthur ('The Passing of Arthur'). Owen's Cilmeri reimagines the death of Prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd of the House of Gwynedd in battle near the village of that name in 1282, while leading a doomed uprising against the occupation of Wales by King Edward I of England . Owen's poem depicts the Prince as a tragic hero and invests his fall with an anguish unmatched since Gruffudd ab yr Ynad Coch wrote his famous lament for the Prince immediately following his death. Owen also, according to Edwards, encapsulates in the Prince's death the Welsh people's continuing \"battle for national survival.\" : 51-53\n\nIn 1999 the centenary of early Gaelic revival poet and Easter Rising leader Patrick Pearse 's initiation into the Gorsedd at the 1899 Pan Celtic Eisteddfod in Cardiff (where he took the Bardic name of Areithiwr) was marked by the unveiling of a plaque at the Consulate General of the Irish Republic in Wales. \n\nIn a ceremony held entirely in the Welsh language during the 2002 National Eisteddfod at St. David's , Rowan Williams , the Anglican Archbishop of Wales , was sworn into the Gorsedd as a \"White Druid\" under the bardic name \"Ap Aneurin\". \n\nAccording to Marcus Tanner, \"The hour-long ritual, which took place at dawn inside a circle of improvised standing stones, seemed culled from the pages of Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings , not least because the more intrusive signs of modern technology, such as loudspeakers, had been concealed beneath wreaths of foliage. After a fanfare of trumpets and the playing of a harp, the Archbishop, dressed in white, laid his hands on a huge sword before being escorted into the heart of the stone circle to meet the horn of plenty . For all its appeal to antiquity, the rite that the company followed was one Iolo Morganwg would have recognized, since he invented it.\" : 189\n\nIn response to sharp criticisms of Archbishop Williams by the English-language media and other Christian clergy , \"for having taken part in a Pagan ritual\", the Archdruid Robyn Lewis said, \"Iolo did create his Gorsedd while fantasizing about Pre-Christian times, but as it developed it rapidly became a mainstream Christian organization.\" : 189-190\n\nDuring the 2018 National Eisteddfod at Cardiff , the bardic crown was awarded to poet and Welsh nationalist Catrin Dafydd , born in Gwaelod y Garth , for her collection Olion (\"Traces\"). Her poems explored Welsh identity in the multiracial and multiethnic Grangetown district of Cardiff . \n\nDuring the ceremony, however, the Archdruid, Geraint Llifon , caused considerable outrage among feminists when he alleged that Catrin Dafydd could not have won the Crown without the help of men. After this caused him to be accused of sexism , Archdruid Llifon apologized. \n\nThe most important is the National Eisteddfod of Wales, the largest festival of competitive music and poetry in Europe. Its eight days of competitions and performances, entirely in the Welsh language, are staged annually in the first week of August in varying locations that usually alternate between north and south Wales. Competitors typically number 6,000 or more; overall attendances generally exceed 150,000 visitors. \n\nAnother important eisteddfod in the calendar is Eisteddfod Yr Urdd or the Youth Eisteddfod. Organised by Urdd Gobaith Cymru , it involves young Welsh people from nursery age to 25 in a week of competition in singing, recitation , dancing, acting and musicianship during the summer half-term school holiday. The event is claimed to be Europe's premier youth arts festival. Regional heats are held in advance and, as with the National Eisteddfod, the Urdd Eisteddfod is held in a different location each year. With the establishment of the Urdd headquarters in the Wales Millennium Centre , the eisteddfod will return to Cardiff every four years.\n\nThe International Eisteddfod is held annually in Llangollen , Denbighshire, each year in July. Choirs, singing groups, folk dancers and other groups attend from all over the world, sharing their national folk traditions in one of the world's great festivals of the arts. It was set up in 1947 and begins with a message of peace. In 2004, it was (unsuccessfully) nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize by Terry Waite , who has been actively involved with the eisteddfod.\n\nSmaller-scale local eisteddfodau are held throughout Wales. One of the best known is the Maes Garmon Eisteddfod, Mold ( Welsh : Eisteddfod Ysgol Maes Garmon, Wyddgrug ). Schools hold eisteddfodau as competitions within the school; a popular date for this is Saint David's Day .\n\nWelsh emigration, particularly during the heyday of the British Empire and British industrial revolution , led to the creation of a global Welsh diaspora . Among the elements from Welsh culture that travelled with these émigrés was the eisteddfod, which – in a variety of forms and languages – continues to exist worldwide.\n\nAccording to Marcus Tanner, the massive 19th-century Welsh immigration to Y Wladfa (\"the Colony\"), in the Chubut Province of Argentine Patagonia began out of the desire of minister and Welsh nationalist Michael D. Jones for \"a Little Wales beyond Wales\". As both cultural assimilation and language loss were already taking hold among the Welsh diaspora throughout the United States and even more so in Canada and other parts of the British Empire , Patagonia was chosen as an alternative. \n\nWhile visiting Puerto Madryn , the main arrival point for immigrants, during the mid-1970s, Bruce Chatwin wrote, \"A hundred and fifty-three Welsh colonists landed here off the brig Mimosa in 1865. They were poor people in search of a New Wales, refugees from cramped coal-mining valleys, from a failed independence movement, and from Parliament 's ban on Welsh in schools . Their leaders had combed the earth for a stretch of open country uncontaminated by Englishmen. They chose Patagonia for its absolute remoteness and foul climate; they did not want to get rich. The Argentine Government gave them land along the Chubut River ( Welsh : Afon Camwy ). From Madryn it was a stretch of forty miles over the thorn desert. And when they did reach the valley, they had the impression that God, not the Government, had given them the land.\" \n\nAlthough eisteddfodau have been held in Argentina ever since the first Welsh immigrants arrived aboard the Mimosa in 1865, assimilation and the loss of contact with the homeland caused both the distinctive Patagonian dialect of the Welsh language and the eisteddfod tradition to be seriously endangered.\n\nIn 1965, Welsh people again began to visit the region to celebrate the colony's centenary. The visit acted as a major impetus to the increasingly assimilated local Welsh Argentine community and since then the number of Welsh visitors and learners of the language has increased. : 340-341\n\nBruce Chatwin visited Gaiman in 1976, which he called \"the centre of Welsh Patagonia today\". While at Ty-Ysaf , the homestead of the Davies family, he was told how the family's son, Euan Davies, had sung at the local eisteddfod while accompanied by Anselmo, a local aspiring concert pianist of mixed German and Italian parentage. Davies' tenor voice and Anselmo's piano playing reportedly reduced the audience at the eisteddfod to tears and \"carried off the prize.\" \n\nMarcus Tanner has written since of Chatwin's travel memoir In Patagonia , \"After several decades during which the Welsh colony in Argentina had been virtually forgotten, his book did much to remind the world of its existence.\" According to Eluned Gonzalez, however, a local Welsh Argentine who remembers the real Chatwin and his visit, \"We are all very surprised by the book... so superior. Looking down on us... a very English way of looking at things.\" \n\nDuring the British government's repatriation of the 11,313 Argentine POWs taken during the 1982 Falklands War , Welsh-speaking British merchant seamen and British soldiers from the Welsh Guards were shocked to find themselves addressed in Patagonian Welsh by an Argentine POW who was on the way home to Puerto Madryn. Over the years since, close ties between Wales and Y Wladfa have been reestablished.\n\nOne of the greatest Welsh literary figures to come out of Y Wladfa was Richard Bryn Williams , whose bardic name was Bryn . Williams was born at Blaenau Ffestiniog , Gwynedd in 1902. When he was seven years old, Williams' family migrated to Trelew , as part of the last great wave of Welsh immigration to Y Wladfa prior to the First World War . Williams returned to Wales in 1923 and studied at the University College of North Wales . He became an expert on Patagonian history and was a major contributor to the Colony's Welsh literature. Williams won the Bardic Chair at the National Eisteddfod of Wales in both 1964 and 1968, and from 1975 to 1978 he served as Archdruid of the Gorsedd Cymru . \n\nA 2001 BBC article described in detail the recent visit to Chubut Province by Archdruid Meirion Evans [ cy ] and 30 members of the Gorsedd Cymru to revive the Gorsedd yr Wladfa in a ceremony held in a specially constructed stone circle near Gaiman.\n\nBBC reporters also attended the 2001 Eisteddfod del Chubut at Trelew and watched as the bardic chair was awarded for the first time in Y Wladfa to a female poet: Gaiman hotel owner Monica Jones de Jones, for an awdl on the subject of rhyddid ('freedom'). The article's author continued, \"the Patagonia Eisteddfod itself, while sharing those elements common to eisteddfodau in Wales itself, nonetheless is, in other respects, quite a different affair. As well as haunting Welsh folk tunes , and recitations in the unique Spanish-accented Welsh of the Patagonians, there are also rousing displays of Argentinian folk dancing which owe everything to the culture of the gauchos and nothing to the somewhat tamer dance routines of the Welsh homeland.\" \n\nWhile visiting Patagonia to research his 2004 book The Last of the Celts , Marcus Tanner visited the Trelew home of local Welsh-language poet Geraint Edmunds . Edmunds was, according to Tanner, \"a Welsh Patagonian of the old type, as fluent in Welsh as Spanish\". During Tanner's visit, he noticed that \"a beautifully made Bardic Chair\", which Geraint Edmunds' poetry had won was on reverent display in the front room. To Tanner's disappointment, however, the bard's son, Eduardo Edmunds, would speak only Spanish and replied when asked about his ancestral language, \"I think I'd rather learn English – more useful.\" : 341\n\nSince Welsh devolution , however, the Welsh Parliament in Cardiff has provided both funding and teachers to joint Welsh-Spanish immersion schools, such as Ysgol yr Hendre , in Chubut Province. \n\nCurrent eisteddfod competitions are bilingual, in both Patagonian Welsh and Argentine Spanish , and include poetry, prose, literary translations (Welsh, Spanish, English, Italian, and French), musical performances, arts, folk dances, photography, and filmmaking, among others. The Eisteddfod del Juventud is held every September at Gaiman. The main Eisteddfod del Chubut is held every October at Trelew. Other annual eisteddfodau are held at Trevelin , in the Andes and at Puerto Madryn along the South Atlantic coast. \n\nEisteddfods ( Australian English : plural) in the traditional Welsh sense have also been adopted into Australian culture. However, the term is more commonly used to describe ballet and music competitions.\n\nFor those eisteddfods most like the Welsh original, they involve testing individuals in singing, dancing, acting and musicianship.\n\nAfter emigrating to Australia from Tregaron , Ceredigion , at the tail end of the Victorian gold rush , Welsh poet and diarist Joseph Jenkins , whose bardic name was Amnon II, arrived at Melbourne in 1869. The following month, as described in his posthumously published memoir The Diary of a Welsh Swagman , Jenkins was living in the gold rush boomtown of Castlemaine where he found many fellow Welsh Australians. He rarely left this vicinity except to attend the annual St David's Day eisteddfod at Ballarat where, on thirteen consecutive occasions, he was awarded first prize for the best englyn . \n\nThe successor to the St. David's Day Eisteddfod in Ballarat , the Royal South Street Eisteddfod , began in 1891 and has been running ever since. \n\nThe second-oldest eisteddfod in Australia is located in Wollongong , the City of Wollongong Eisteddfod , which began in 1894 and has been running ever since. \n\nThe Sydney Eisteddfod was first held in 1933 and offers some 400 events across all performing arts, catering to 30,000 performers annually.\n\nModern eisteddfods in Australia are competitions reserved for schoolchildren, though many have open sections where anyone (including professionals) may participate and compete. Typically, a prize may be a scholarship to pursue a further career. Many young Australian actors and dancers participate regularly in the various competitions scheduled throughout the year. The Western Australia Performing Arts Eisteddfod began in 1958 as the Bunbury Music Festival. The Gold Coast Eisteddfod in Queensland began in 1982 and is held annually in August and September. The 2018 eisteddfod attracted over 60,000 competitors. Many other communities also host eisteddfods, including Alice Springs , Darwin , Brisbane , Hobart and Melbourne .\n\nThe Guernsey Eisteddfod was founded in 1922 and includes events in the Guernésiais language; the Jersey Eisteddfod was founded in 1908 and includes events in Jèrriais dialect of Norman French . \n\nEisteddfodau are held across the UK, although in most cases any explicit link to Welsh culture has been lost beyond the use of the name for an arts festival or competition.\n\nIn 1897 a Forest of Dean Eisteddfod, reportedly a choral competition, was founded at Cinderford . \n\nIn the Methodist Church and other non-conformist denominations in England, youth cultural festivals are sometimes called eisteddfod. The Kettering and District Eisteddfod, for example, was founded in the early 1900s in the Northamptonshire town by members of the Sunday School Union and still runs every March. \n\nThe Bristol Festival of Music, Speech and Drama was founded in 1903 as the Bristol Eisteddfod. \n\nThe Minsterley Eisteddfod has been held every March in South Shropshire since 1962. \n\nThe Teesside International Eisteddfod (Intertie) in Middlesbrough ran from 1966 to 1978. [ citation needed ]\n\nFor many years Teignmouth Grammar School in Teignmouth , Devonshire, held an eisteddfod of art, music and drama competitions in the Easter term. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn South African English , a number of international performing arts competitions in are called eisteddfods, such as the Tygerberg International Eisteddfod and the Pretoria Eisteddfod (first held in 1923). The word eisteddfod is sometimes also used for ordinary cultural festivals, even if only one school's students participate.\n\nIn August 1953, the poet Ingrid Jonker , who would go on to become an anti-apartheid political dissident and a hugely influential figure in Afrikaans literature , recited her poems at the Cape Eisteddfod in Cape Town and received there a Diploma for Achievement in Afrikaans . \n\nMoving first as religious refugees and then as farmers and industrial workers, many thousands of Welsh people emigrated to America from the 17th century.\n\nIn 1757, Reverend Goronwy Owen , an Anglican vicar born at Y Dafarn Goch , in the parish of Llanfair Mathafarn Eithaf in Anglesey and the poet most responsible for the subsequent Welsh eighteenth-century renaissance, emigrated to Williamsburg , in the Colony of Virginia . Until his death on his cotton and tobacco plantation near Lawrenceville, Virginia in 1769, Owen was mostly noted as an émigré bard, writing with hiraeth ('longing') for his native Anglesey . During the subsequent revival of the eisteddfod, the Gwyneddigion Society held up the poetry of Owen as an example for bards at future eisteddfodau to emulate.\n\nDuring the eisteddfod revival of the 1790s, Gwyneddigion Society member William Jones , who had enthusiastically supported the American Revolution and who was arguing for the creation of a National Eisteddfod of Wales, had come to believe that the completely Anglicized Welsh nobility , through rackrenting and their employment of unscrupulous land agents, had forfeited all right to the obedience and respect of their tenants. At the Llanrwst eisteddfod in June 1791, Jones distributed copies of an address, entitled To all Indigenous Cambro-Britons , in which he urged Welsh tenant farmers and craftsmen to pack their bags, emigrate from Wales, and sail for what he called the \"Promised Land\" in the United States of America. \n\nBy 1851, Y Drych ('The Mirror'), published from the Welsh-speaking settlement in Utica, New York : 325 was just the latest of a number of Welsh-language newspapers, and in 1872 Hanes Cymry America ('A history of the Welsh in America') by R.D. Thomas attempted to catalogue all of the Welsh communities of the United States. Eisteddfodau in North America are thought to have started in the 1830s, though the earliest documented examples date from the 1840s and, especially, the 1850s. Efforts to introduce the Gorsedd into the United States, on the other hand, were less successful and never attracted more than 303 members. \n\nAccording to Celticist Gethin Matthews, \"Next to the chapels, the Eisteddfod was the most potent symbol of Welsh exceptionalism in America. As such, the success of each locality's eisteddfod became a status symbol within the diaspora: something to boast about in the pages of Y Drych , or one of the other periodicals ... There is also a strong link between the eisteddfod tradition and the printed word, with thirty-three publications (from 8 to 464 pages in length) being the fruit of such festivals. Although most of them were published in Utica (which became the hub of the Welsh-American publishing business), they represent the output of eisteddfodau in a wide range of location, including settlements far from the eastern seaboard such as Racine , Denver , and San Francisco .\" \n\nAccording to Marcus Tanner, large-scale Welsh immigration to America began in the 1790s, when 50 immigrants left the village of Llanbrynmair for a tract of Pennsylvania land purchased by Baptist minister Morgan John Rhys . The result was the Welsh-American farming settlement of Cambria, Pennsylvania . : 325\n\nBy 1913, a sub- gorsedd of North America with a vice-Archdruid, Reverend Thomas Edwards whose bardic name was Cynonfardd, was established at the Pittsburgh Eisteddfod, surviving until 1946. \n\nThe Edwardsville Cynonfardd Eisteddfod at the Dr. Edwards Memorial Church in Edwardsville, Pennsylvania has taken place annually since 1889 and is the longest continuously running eisteddfod outside of Wales. The 130th anniversary of the event was celebrated in April 2019. \n\nWelsh-American settlements in Ohio began in 1801, when a group of Welsh-speaking pioneers migrated from Cambria, Pennsylvania to Paddy's Run, which is now the site of Shandon, Ohio . : 325\n\nAccording to Marcus Tanner, \"In Ohio State, Jackson and Gallia counties in particular became a 'Little Wales', where Welsh settlers were sufficiently thick on the ground by the 1830s to justify the establishment of Calvinistic Methodist synods .\" : 325\n\nAs late as 1900, Ohio still had 150 Welsh-speaking church congregations. : 326 The Welsh language was commonly spoken there for generations until the 1950s when its use began to subside. As of 2010, more than 126,000 Ohioans are of Welsh descent and about 135 speak the language, with significant concentrations still found in many communities of Ohio such as Oak Hill (13.6%), Madison (12.7%), Franklin (10.5%), Jackson (10.0%), Radnor (9.8%), and Jefferson (9.7%). \n\nThe Jackson School Eisteddfod in Jackson, Ohio, is the result of an historically strong Welsh-American business community, who funded the Southern Ohio Eisteddfod Association and a 4,000-seat auditorium that was the only dedicated eisteddfod venue in the United States. In 1930, the hall hosted the Grand National Eisteddfod. While the Great Depression halted the adult events, a youth eisteddfod, founded in 1924, still runs today, with support from the Madog Center for Welsh Studies at University of Rio Grande . \n\nAfter the Treaty of Traverse des Sioux was signed by the Dakota people in 1851, Welsh-speaking pioneers from Wisconsin , Upstate New York , and Ohio settled much of what is now Le Sueur and Blue Earth counties in Minnesota . By 1857, the number of Welsh-speakers was so numerous that the Minnesota State Constitution had to be translated into the Welsh language. : 325 With such a large number of settlers, it should come as no surprise that eisteddfodau soon followed. \n\nLocal Welsh-language poet James Price , whose bardic name was Ap Dewi ('Son of David'), was born at Newark, Ohio to parents from Llanon , Ceredigion . : 254 After migrating to the Minnesota frontier, Ap Dewi served as a deacon and Sunday school teacher at the Horeb Calvinistic Methodist Church in Cambria Township , Blue Earth County : 64 and was so dominant at local eisteddfodau that he was considered the \" prifardd of Minnesota.\" : 138\n\nThe first Welsh literary society in Minnesota was founded, according to Ap Dewi, at a meeting held in South Bend Township , also in Blue Earth County in the fall of 1855. : 129 Also according to Ap Dewi, \"The first eisteddfod in the state of Minnesota was held in Judson in the house of Wm. C. Williams in 1864. The second eisteddfod was held in Judson in the log chapel in 1866 with the Rev. John Roberts as chairman. Ellis E. Ellis, Robert E. Hughes, H.H. Hughes, Rev. J. Jenkins, and William R. Jones took part in this eisteddfod. The third eisteddfod was held in Judson in the new chapel (Jerusalem) on January 2, 1871. The famous Llew Llwyfo (bardic name) was chairman and a splendid time was had.\" : 131\n\nAccording to David M. Jones, a Calvinistic Methodist minister born at Ty Rhedyn, near Marian-glas , Anglesey and Welsh-language writer whose literary talents drew comparisons with Washington Irving , : 215-216 the first eisteddfod held in Cambria Township took place on the Fourth of July , 1871. A \"low-lying site behind the house of John Shields\" was chosen for the Maes and, as Jones later recalled, \"We cut tiers of seats into a natural bank of land and covered the seats with hay. These were the first seats with cushions we had ever seen in Minnesota, and everyone praised them. We built a platform in front of the seats. There was a clear stream running between the platform and the seats. All of us felt that our fine preparations would ensure the success of the program. On the morning of the Fourth, everyone was ready long before the Minnesota sun appeared. In a little while, there were clouds of dust being stirred up by large wagons coming from every direction. The immense prairie was dotted with wagons drawn by horses, mules , and horned oxen . Long before the time, the seats were full.\" : 139-140\n\nEllis Ellis , a Mankato joiner from Aberdyfi , Merionethshire and whose bardic name was Glan Dyfi (after the village of the same name), : 184-185 was, according to Jones, \"the adjudicator for the poetry, and it is more than likely that Ap Dewi won the prize. What the subject was, we do not recall, though it is likely that there was a subject. Not often did a Bard compose without a subject. Evan Evans, Daniel Jones, and W.P. Jones must have competed in the essay competition, adjudicated by the cultured David S. Davies. In the humorous address competition, Evan Evans and Henry Hughes were both winners. There were various recitations by Owen Morris and Thomas Hughes, who were masterly as usual, among others. John S. Davies and his group sang several pieces, and the singers of Bethel also took part. Owen Richards and his brother, Tomy Richards, took part in the first eisteddfod. Johnnie Jones from the same district turned out to be skillful at recitation. Before the end of the last meeting one of the Minnesota storms came on, and the audience scattered in a moment.\" : 141\n\nAccording to Ap Dewi, local eisteddfodau began being held in the county seat of Mankato on 1 January 1873, when one took place at the Blue Earth County Courthouse . : 131\n\nDuring the same era, a group of Welsh-language poets used to meet regularly under the leadership of Ellis Ellis (Glan Dyfi) at the Cheshire and Jones Shop in Mankato, where the packing paper in the shop was often used to write down englynion in Welsh. : 142-143\n\nDavid Jones later expressed a belief that the englynion composed at the Cheshire and Jones Shop were superior to those of far more famous Welsh poets such as Dewi Wyn, Dewi Havhesp , and Dyfed . : 142 Jones further recalled, \"Glan Dyfi never had any more enjoyment than when tinkering with the elements of englynion , tossing off so many englynion while taking no notice of the rules of Dafydd ab Edmwnd or any other Dafydd . O! To have those old times back again.\" : 143\n\nBeginning in 1874, eisteddfodau were held annually at the Union Hall in Mankato until 1876, when the custom fell into abeyance until 1890. The 1890 eisteddfod was held on 5 February at the Mankato Opera House, under the leadership of Thomas Hughes and continued there. : 131-136\n\nBy the 1880s between 2,500 and 3,000 people of Welsh background in Minnesota were contributing to the life of some 17 churches and 22 chapels. \n\nThe first eisteddfod held in the Twin Cities took place, \"on a fairly large scale\", and sponsored by the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist chapel on Franklin Avenue in Minneapolis , on 17 January 1885. : 210-211\n\nA second Minneapolis eisteddfod was held, with the participation of adjudicators and contestants from St. Paul, Minnesota , Lime Springs, Iowa , and Cambria, Wisconsin , on Christmas Day, 1888. : 211\n\nA third Minneapolis eisteddfod was held, under the patronage of the Welsh Calvinistic Methodist chapel and Y Wyddorfa , the Welsh literary society of Minneapolis, on St. David's Day , 1894. Adjudicated contests were held for essays, recitations, poetry, literary translations , and performances. : 211-213\n\nAccording to a 2006 article in the Mankato Free Press the custom of local eisteddfodau went into abeyance during the 1950s. An effort was made, however, during the early 21st century, to revive the tradition by the Blue Earth County Historical Society and the Mankato Chapter of the League of Minnesota Poets . During the 2006 Cambria eisteddfod at the Morgan Creek Vineyards in New Ulm , Brainerd poet Doris Stengel was awarded the bardic chair by adjudicator John Calvin Rezmerski. \n\nBut, following Rezmerski's death in 2016, the custom of local eisteddfodau again fell into abeyance.\n\nCompetitive eisteddfod were held during the American Civil War , with themes including George Washington , Abraham Lincoln , American patriotism , and Jefferson Davis . \n\nAlso during the American Civil War, Edward Thomas , a Welsh-language poet born in Centerville, Ohio to parents from Llanidloes and whose bardic name was Awenydd , was living and working as a schoolmaster at the Welsh-American farming settlement at South Bend Township , in Blue Earth County, Minnesota. In 1862, he enlisted in Company E of the 2nd Minnesota Cavalry Regiment . During his service in that regiment, Thomas wrote many Welsh-language poems, including Pryddest ar Wir Fawredd , which later won the bardic crown at an eisteddfod held in Minersville, Pennsylvania . Following the end of the war, Thomas became a Calvinistic Methodist minister. : 273\n\nMrs. Jennie A. Ingalls, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. H.O. Roberts of Minneapolis, won a prize for best recitation at an 1890 eisteddfod held in Chicago, Illinois. : 213\n\nThe largest U.S. eisteddfod was held in 1893 at the World Columbian Exposition in Chicago , featuring visiting Welsh choirs invited by the Chicago chapter of the Cymmrodorion Society . The Mormon Tabernacle Choir , which then included a large number of Welsh immigrants, made its first appearance outside of Utah at the same event. At the same eisteddfod, Reverend Evan Reese , a Calvinistic Methodist minister from Puncheston , Pembrokeshire, and Welsh poet whose bardic name was Dyfed, won the bardic chair and the $500 prize money offered for a 2,000 line awdl on the set subject Iesu o Nazareth (' Jesus of Nazareth '). : 31 Reese went on to become the Archdruid of the Gorsedd Cymru and to announce the posthumous victory of Hedd Wyn at the infamous 1917 Eisteddfod of the Black Chair. \n\nThe eisteddfod idea has been retained by some subsequent world's fairs , and has helped to link the Welsh eisteddfod community to its Welsh-American offshoot.\n\nThe first Eisteddfod in the State of California was organized by Thomas Gwallter Price , whose Bardic name was \"Cuhelyn\", and took place in North San Juan on July 4th, 1860. \n\nOn 28 July 1915, the International Eisteddfod held in San Francisco at the Panama–Pacific International Exposition drew competing choirs from around the nation, including one mixed group composed of the German members of the Metropolitan Opera Chorus from New York City The tightly rehearsed, all-male Orpheus Club of Los Angeles were judged the winner and were awarded $3,000. \n\nIn 1926, the Pasadena Playhouse in Pasadena, California , held a competitive eisteddfod of one-act plays by local authors that subsequently evolved into an annual Summer One-Act Play Festival .\n\nThe 2011 West Coast Eisteddfod event was co-curated by Lorin Morgan-Richards and held at the Barnsdall Art Park in Los Angeles, the site of Welsh-American architect Frank Lloyd Wright 's Hollyhock House , near Griffith Park , founded by Welsh-American philanthropist Griffith J. Griffith . \n\nFrom 1925 to 2016, the Los Angeles St. David's Day Festival was the largest Welsh-American cultural event in the United States. It included an eisteddfod, a Celtic marketplace, classes, and a concert. Celebrities of Welsh heritage Henry Thomas , Ioan Gruffudd , Michael Sheen , along with Richard Burton 's and Frank Lloyd Wright's families have all publicly supported the festival. \n\nThe West Coast Eisteddfod (originally the Left Coast Eisteddfod) was founded by Welsh-American social network AmeriCymru and the non-profit Portland , Oregon, Meriwether Lewis Memorial Eisteddfod Foundation in 2009. \n\nWelsh Heritage Week and Cwrs Cymraeg , two ambulatory Welsh language and culture courses held annually, usually in the United States, also each feature a mini-eisteddfod. The North American Festival of Wales held by the Welsh North American Association also includes an eisteddfod. \n\nIn the 21st century the internet and social media helped new eisteddfodau to spring up. For example, AmeriCymru hosts an annual online eisteddfod. \n\nVarious festivals in other Celtic cultures have similarities to eisteddfodau.\n\nAccording to Marcus Tanner, even though the Breton people have never faced the dire poverty or mass starvation once commonly risked among Irish language speakers, efforts to preserve the Breton language and its literature have traditionally faced an antagonist with a radically different political ideology than speakers of Celtic languages in the British Isles . Since the 1789 French Revolution and Reign of Terror , mainstream republicanism in France has embraced policies of Secularisation , centralizing government power in Paris , and coercive Francization through the State-controlled educational system. \n\nDespite its long history of hostility to religious practice, Marcus Tanner has written that traditional French republicanism is ironically \"a Messianic ideology\". In an early 21st century interview with Marcus Tanner, Ronan Le Coadic [ fr ] explained that post-1789 French Governments have successfully sold the French language as, \"the language of progress\" and have taught minority language speakers that, \"All others were the languages of the Church and the nobility . Children were taught that Breton was the language of poverty and the past. Even recently I have interviewed people who recalled their shame at school for knowing Breton.\" \n\nIn contrast, ever since Pope Gregory XI issued the règle d'idiom (\"the rule of idiom\") in 1373, Roman Catholic clergy were commanded to learn how to preach to and communicate with their flocks in the vernacular . This is also why, ever since the French Revolution , the traditional proverb in the Breton language ( Breton : \"Ar brezonek hag ar feiz, A zo breur ha c'hoar e Breiz\" ) (\"Breton and [the] Faith are brother and sister in Brittany\"), was once commonly quoted. \n\nBelievers in Breton cultural nationalism have, for these reasons, often been dissidents who criticized or opposed at least some elements of French Republican ideology. This is also why efforts to introduce a form of the Eisteddfod into the Breton language revival date from the immediate aftermath of the Revolution.\n\nEven though the neo-bardic, Gorsedd , and Eisteddfod movement in Brittany was founded during the early 19th century by Auguste Brizeux , the real heyday of the movement took place between 1900 and the outbreak of the First World War . Those two decades were dominated by François Jaffrenou , whose bardic name was Taldir, and who introduced many Iolo Morganwg -inspired elements of Welsh culture into Breton culture and literature . During those decades, Taldir founded the Gorsedd Barzed Gourenez Breiz Isel (The Gorsedd of Bards of the Peninsula of Brittany) and did much to encourage both traditional Celtic poetry and a sense of community among Breton Bards. \n\nIn 1936, Morvan Marchal founded the explicitly anti-Christian and neo-Pagan Kredenn Geltiek Hollvedel (World Celtic Creed) group, of which he became the first arch-Druid. The group broke openly from the Goursez Vreizh.\n\nMeanwhile, following the Liberation of France , the Government of the newly founded Fourth French Republic launched a propaganda campaign that still continues. It attempted to discredit all activism in favor of Breton cultural and language revival , political devolution , and Breton-medium education by depicting it as synonymous with treason and collaboration with Nazism . This has proven to be far from successful. \n\nPêr-Jakez Helias, who was both a World War II veteran of the French Resistance and a major figure in Breton literature , later recalled in his memoirs the massive public backlash and roots revival this provoked and his own role in it, \"As soon as World War II ended, 'Celtic Clubs' were being founded everywhere in Brittany, but especially in the Breton-speaking regions. The members were young people whose objective was to bring the peasant tradition, with all its costumes, its dances, and its games back into esteem. Within ten years several hundred of these groups had been organized. At the same time, thanks to the persistence of a few pioneers, other young people began to take lessons from the last of the professional bagpipers and oboeists , who were ending their lives in a state of melancholy... Think of thousands of young people involved in traditional art forms at a time when their traditions were both alive and threatened, perhaps even doomed, and faced with a new society which they couldn't count on in any way. How could they possibly not have protested?\" \n\nSince 1923, the Festival de Cornouaille ( Breton : Cornouaille Kemper ) has taken place annually in Quimper , located in the south-west of Brittany. It began as a beauty contest during which one girl was crowned as festival queen, which drew firm objections from the Catholic Church during its post- World War II revival in 1948. The Cornouaille Kemper was accordingly transformed by Pêr-Jakez Helias, François Bégot and Jo Halleguen into an Eisteddfod-inspired summer festival celebrating Breton culture , mythology , literature, and traditional music. \n\nThe similar Kan ar Bobl competition, which is held as part of the Festival Interceltique de Lorient , supports the Breton music tradition.\n\nThe AberFest in Cornwall alternates with the Breizh – Kernow Festival which is held either in Brandivy or Bignan in Brittany.\n\nIn Cornwall , an analogous event is known as Esedhvos Kernow ( Cornish for 'Eisteddfod of Cornwall') and is connected, as part of the ongoing Cornish language revival , with the Gorsedh Kernow . \n\nAberFest is a festival that celebrates both Cornish and Breton culture and takes place in Cornwall every second year around Easter.\n\nA similar tradition has been created among descendants of the Cornish diaspora in Australia. \"Australia's Little Cornwall\" is the district of the Yorke Peninsula in South Australia known as the Copper Triangle , which includes the former mining towns of Moonta , Kadina and Wallaroo . In Moonta today, the Kernewek Lowender (Cornish for 'Cornish Happiness'), which includes an eisteddfod-like gathering of bards, is the largest Cornish festival in the world and attracts more than 40,000 visitors each event. The Cornish language revival has also spread to the Cornish diaspora and is spoken by some enthusiasts in Australia. Senior members of the Gorsedh Kernow make frequent visits to Australia, and there are a number of Cornish Australian bards . \n\nDuring the days of Gaelic Ireland and of the Irish clans , there was a tradition similar to the first eisteddfodau. Irish clan chiefs would host feasts for their clansmen, servants, and warriors which centered around a contest between Irish-language bards, whose poetry was performed by professional singers accompanied by a harp . As in 12th-century Wales, the clan chief always chose the winner with the approval of those assembled. This tradition, which arose during the 14th century, was termed a Gairm Sgoile ( Early Modern Irish : 'summoning', or 'gathering', 'of the [Bardic] school'). \n\nThis title referred to the fact that Irish language bards were trained in the dark at special bardic schools ( Irish : Sgoile ) based on the principle of memorization of Irish bardic poetry and stories about the deities of Irish mythology . Irish bards and their students were expected to compose their verses lying down and in the dark, \"to avoid the distraction which light and the variety of objects represented commonly occasions\" and to concentrate solely, \"upon the subject at hand and the theme given\". \n\nThe most famous gathering of the bardic school took place on Christmas Day, 1351. William Ua Cellaig , Chief of the Name and King of Uí Maine in Connacht , held, like Prince Rhys ap Gruffydd , a great competition and feast for the bards of Ireland. An entire temporary village was erected with separate streets for musicians, seanchaithe , poets, and jugglers.\n\nThe traditional Connacht Irish phrase, \"Fáilte Uí Cheallaigh\" (\"An O'Kelly Welcome\") dates from this event, which was held at Gailey Castle along Lough Ree , near what is now Knockcroghery , County Roscommon . The feast reportedly lasted for a month. It was during this feast that the poet, Gofraidh Fionn Ó Dálaigh , wrote the poem, Filidh Éireann go hAointeach , which remembers the feast. \n\nAfter the 16th and 17th century dispossession, emigration , and outlawry of the Irish clan chiefs and the loss of their patronage , the teachers and former students of the bardic schools were forced to adapt.\n\nAccording to Vivian Mercier , \"It is not enough to say that the Gaelic-speaking aristocracy were dispossessed of their lands: the poets themselves were landholders, a sort of Noblesse de robe , whose dispossession accompanied or followed that of the Noblesse d'épée . The overthrow of the bardic institution was accompanied by a change in poetic technique which enables one to judge with considerable accuracy whether a given poem belongs to the bardic period or not: syllabic metre ( dán díreach ) gives way to stress or song metre ( amhrán ). This change reflects not only the gradual disappearance of the bardic schools but also of the bardic audience; most authorities believe that the stress metres had been common among the common people for a long time before poems in those metres were granted the dignity of being committed to manuscript. If the dispossessed and often starving poet wanted the favour of his new patrons - those who were only less poor than he - he must cater to their tastes.\" \n\nThe bards overwhelmingly adapted, according to Daniel Corkery , by becoming teachers at the hedge schools in Irish villages. : 68-94\n\nMeanwhile, in 18th-century Munster , the custom arose, in what was both mimicry and satire of the ceremonial of the English-dominated legal and court system, of the local chief-bard presiding over sessions of a cúirt , or poetic court. A cúirt would begin with \" bailiffs \" delivering often humorously worded \" warrants \" which summoned local Irish-language poets to a bardic competition presided over by the chief-bard as \"judge\". In many cases, two poets at the cúirt would engage in flyting : 95-125 ( Classical Gaelic : immarbág ) ( Irish : iomarbháigh ) (lit. \"counter-boasting\"), meaning the trading of insults in verse often improvised on the spot. According to Corkery, much of the serious, improvised, and comic poetry in the Irish language composed for sessions of the Munster poetic courts was written down by the court \"recorders\" and still survives. : 95-125 At the beginning of his term, the Chief-Poet of a district, similarly to an Irish clan chief, would receive a Staff of Office ( Irish : Bata na Bachaille ), which would later be handed down to his successor. \n\nAlso according to Corkery, the patronage of Bardic and musical contests also continued among the very few remaining families from the Gaelic nobility of Ireland ; like the O'Connell family of Derrynane House in County Kerry and the MacDermot Princes of Coolavin in County Sligo, who continued to hold at least a part of their ancestral lands, while ruling over their tenants and servants as the Chief of the Name. : 42-67\n\nAt least for a time, some Anglo-Irish landlords hosted similar contests. During the early 18th century, Irish-language poet, composer, and itinerant harpist Turlough O'Carolan is said to have improvised Carolan's Concerto inside the house of the Anglo-Irish Power family, during such a contest against the Italian violinist Francesco Geminiani . According to other versions of the story, the contest that resulted in the impromptu composition of Carolan's Concerto took place at the home of Church of Ireland clergyman, poet, and satirist Jonathan Swift .\n\nSince it was founded as part of the Gaelic revival by Conradh na Gaeilge in 1897, the eisteddfod-inspired festival known as Oireachtas na Gaeilge was envisaged to spearhead a renaissance of Irish-language literature, culture, and the arts. \n\nIn contrast to today's Oireachtas, there was more emphasis on Modern literature in Irish than upon Irish traditional music or the performing arts . There were two competitions for Irish poetry , five for Irish language essays , one for best poetry collection; a competition for unpublished songs or short stories in Irish; a competition for best new song composition, and a recitation competition.\n\nThe early organizers of Oireachtas pulled off several major accomplishments, such as the first staging of Robert O'Dwyer 's Eithne , the first Irish-language opera , in 1909. Even so, the popularity of Oireachtas waned following the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Irish Civil War , and the festival was repeatedly cancelled during the 1920s and 1930s.\n\nThe festival was traditionally held in Dublin , but, beginning in 1974, Coiste Cearta Síbialta na Gaeilge ( English : Irish Language Civil Rights Committee\") successfully coerced an end to the practice of never holding Oireachtas in Ireland's Gaeltacht areas. \n\nOireachtas currently culminates in four major competitions over the weekend: Comórtas na mBan, a sean-nós singing competition for women, Comórtas na bhFear, a similar one for men, and Corn Uí Riada , one for both genders and all ages. There is also the Comórtas Damhsa ar an Sean Nós (\"Steip\"), a Sean-nós dance competition mainly based on the Connemara stepdancing style now popular throughout the country, but also including dancing in other regional styles.\n\nThe organisers, under the Directorship of Liam Ó Maolaodha have attempted from the 1990s on to market Oireachtas to millennial Irish speakers via outings, discos, and other youth-oriented events.\n\nSince it was also founded by Conradh na Gaeilge in 1902, Seachtain na Gaeilge (English: Irish Language Week), which is similarly based upon the Welsh eisteddfod, has celebrated Irish traditional music , Gaelic games , and Irish culture .\n\nThe festival begins each year on St David's Day and ends on St Patrick's Day , with community-organised events celebrated all over Ireland and the world, such as céilís , concerts, quizzes, competitions and parades. Like the first documented 12th-century eisteddfod, the 14th-century Gairm Sgoile and the 18th-century Munster Cúirt , Seachtain na Gaeilge includes a contest between Irish poets in the Irish language.\n\nThe Fleadh Cheoil is an annual festival for Irish traditional music that takes place in the same town for a few years in a row, before moving to another area of Ireland in an effort to include all localities in the celebration.\n\nAfter the end of the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Civil War , the 1924-1937 revival of the ancient Tailteann Games also emulated the Welsh Eisteddfod by including ceremonies in Pre-Christian Irish clothing and inspired by Irish mythology .\n\nThere is also the event known as Imram , which was founded in 2004 by Liam Carson, who had noticed that there was no literary festival dedicated to Irish literature in the Irish language. In response, Carson received funding from Poetry Ireland , Dublin City Council , and Foras na Gaeilge . According to Carson, \"The festival name means ‘a voyage of discovery’ and what we’re asking people to do is come with us and discover the Irish language.\" \n\nUnlike in other Celtic nations , the Eisteddfod in the Isle of Man has much less to do with the ongoing revival efforts spearheaded by Brian Stowell , Robert Corteen Carswell , Yn Çheshaght Ghailckagh , and the Bunscoill Ghaelgagh , for the island's heritage language of Manx Gaelic , its literature , and its culture . Even so, an Eisteddfod has been held since the Great Depression in Braaid and remains a highly anticipated and widely attended event by the Manx people . \n\nFor players and enthusiasts of Gaelic and Manx traditional music and dancing, there is also the Shennaghys Jiu (\"Traditional Day\") festival. A closer parallel to the Eisteddfod is the annual Cooish festival held since 1996 in Peel, Isle of Man .\n\nThe Scottish Gaelic mòd , a festival of Scottish Gaelic song, literature , arts and culture, is modeled upon the Welsh eisteddfod. The mòd , however, is different in that it lacks the 12th-century roots or the fictitious rituals introduced by Iolo Morganwg.\n\nSimilarly to the Welsh word eisteddfod , the Gaelic word mòd , which derives from the Old Norse word mót , refers to a Viking Age Thing or a gathering of Scottish clans . In the Highlands and Islands , however, the term originally referred to the Council of the Isles, Scottish clan chiefs who advised Somerled and his successors among as Lords of the Isles . Finlaggan on Islay was the usual site for the gathering of the Council of the Isles. \n\nSimilar to the Eisteddfod and other Celtic festivals, the mòd was founded in response to colonialism and in an effort to preserve an increasingly endangered language from the coercive Anglicisation of the educational system.\n\nAccording to Marcus Tanner, the Society in Scotland for Propagating Christian Knowledge was incorporated under Queen Anne in 1709 and began building both schools and libraries in the Scottish Highlands and Islands with a twofold purpose. The first purpose was to prevent the Gaels from returning to the still illegal and underground Catholic Church in Scotland . The second was to ensure, \"that in process of time Britons from North to South may speak the same language\". For this reason, all schoolmasters were under orders to teach their students only in English and to subject any student who spoke Gaelic inside the school or on the playground to flogging . \n\nUnder the 1872 Education Act , school attendance was compulsory and only English was taught or tolerated in the schools of both the Lowlands and the Highlands and Islands . As a result, any student who spoke Scots or Scottish Gaelic in the school or on its grounds could expect what Ronald Black calls the \"familiar Scottish experience of being thrashed for speaking [their] native language.\" \n\nIn response, An Comunn Gàidhealach was founded at Oban in 1891 to help preserve the Scottish Gaelic language and its literature and to establish the Royal National Mòd ( Am Mòd Nàiseanta Rìoghail ), as a festival of Gaelic music, literature, arts, and culture deliberately modelled upon the National Eisteddfod of Wales. The poet, traditional singer , and Highland Land League activist Màiri Mhòr nan Òran (1821–1898), performed in the first Mòd's Gaelic song competition, but she was not awarded a medal. \n\nA mòd largely takes the form of formal competitions. Choral events in Gaelic (both solo and by choirs), and Scottish traditional music including fiddling , bagpipe and folk groups dominate. Spoken word events include children's and adults' poetry reading, storytelling and Bible reading, and categories such as ancient folk tale or humorous monologue . Children can also present an original drama, and there are competitions in written literature.\n\nUnlike the national mòd , local mòd s usually only last a day or two. They attract a much smaller crowd and the only notable social event is the winners' ceilidh . As there are fewer competitions than in the national mòd , this ceilidh is often more like a traditional ceilidh with dancing and guest singers between the winners' performances.\n\nAccording to Ronald Black, \"In 1923, following the example of the Welsh Eisteddfod, An Commun Gàidhealach simplified the structure of its annual poetry competitions into a single contest for a Bardic Crown ( Scottish Gaelic : Crùn na Bàrdachd ), the winner to be acknowledged as Bard of An Commun ( Scottish Gaelic : Bàird a' Chomuinn Gàidhealaich ) for the coming year. The man behind the move, not surprisingly, was Angus Robertson, then President of An Comunn. Offering a distinctive middle path between traditional and modern verse, the competition produced much work of note which deserves to be put into perspective... (Many subsidiary prizes remained; Sorley Maclean won a junior one in 1928, while in 1946 Derick Thomson won a gold medal as the most distinguished entrant in the literary competitions generally). The Bard was crowned each year at the closing concert of the Mòd. Astonishingly, unlike in Wales, the winning poem itself formed no part of the proceedings... In 1978 no award was made because not entry was of adequate quality. It was the second time in five years that this had happened, and in March 1979 An Comunn announced that the Bardic Crown would no longer be awarded.\" \n\nThere has been some recent criticism of the \"Gold Medal\" event, which favors the operatic-style Gaelic singing popularized in the early 20th century by Marjory Kennedy-Fraser . Some 21st century Scottish traditional musicians allege that the contest has long marginalised more traditional singers like the late Flora MacNeil and their styles. This is not a new criticism, however, and the poet Allan MacDonald (1859–1905), an iconic figure in Scottish Gaelic literature , once said that the Gaelic songs performed at the Mòd during its inception were, \"As though you were to fit a statue into a box by taking off the nose and ears.\" \n\nMore recently, Scottish traditional musician Fergus Munro has also gone on the record, as Scotland has grown increasingly secularised, as a critic of what he alleges is a growing tendency to exclude both Christian poetry and Gaelic psalm - and hymn -singing from the Mòd. \n\nFurthermore, the Mòd is popularly known as the \" Whisky Olympics\", which is considered, \"either a vicious slur or fair comment\". \n\nSimilarly to the Eisteddfod, since its more recent creation, the Mòd tradition has been introduced to the Scottish diaspora .\n\nIn Nova Scotia , where a distinctive form of Gaelic brought by the early Highland settlers preserves the otherwise extinct Lochaber dialect, the Nova Scotia Gaelic Mod attracts visitors from both sides of the Canada–United States border .\n\nIn British Columbia , the Gaelic Society of Vancouver held a local mòd biannually from 1990 to 2007. \n\nFirst held at Alexandria, Virginia in 1988, the U.S. National Mòd is now held annually as part of the Highland games at Ligonier, Pennsylvania and sponsored by An Comunn Gàidhealach Ameireaganach ('The American Scottish Gaelic Society'). \n\nThe 2011 Royal National Mòd , held at Stornoway on the Isle of Lewis , crowned Lewis MacKinnon ( Lodaidh MacFhionghain ), a poet in the Canadian Gaelic dialect spoken in Antigonish County , Nova Scotia , as the winning bard. It was the first time in the 120-year history of the mòd that a writer of Gaelic poetry from the Scottish diaspora had won the Bardic Crown. ",
  "Emmenbrücke Kapf railway station ( German : Bahnhof Emmenbrücke Kapf ) is a railway station in the municipality of Emmen , in the Swiss canton of Lucerne . It is an intermediate stop on the standard gauge Olten–Lucerne line of Swiss Federal Railways . Until the December 2022 timetable change, the station was named Rothenburg Dorf , after the nearby municipality of Rothenburg . \n\nAs of the December 2022 timetable change, [update] the following services stop at Emmenbrücke Kapf: ",
  "Eduard Oscar Schmidt (21 February 1823, in Torgau – 17 January 1886, in Kappelrodeck ) was a German zoologist and phycologist .\n\nHe initially studied mathematics and science at Halle , then continued his education in Berlin , where he came under the influence of Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg and Johannes Peter Müller . In 1847 he received his habilitation at the University of Jena , becoming an associate professor during the following year. In 1855 was he appointed professor of zoology at the University of Cracow . Later he taught classes at the Universities of Graz (from 1857) and Strasbourg (from 1872 till his death in 1886).\n\nSchmidt was an early proponent of Darwinian evolutionary thought . He is remembered for his research of Porifera (sponges), particularly species from the Adriatic Sea . Schmidt also made contributions in the field of phycology .\n\nAs far back as 1862 Oscar Schmidt showed that \"cuttings\" of sponges will attach themselves and grow. This idea was followed through in the experiments of Croatian scientist Grgur Bučić on the island of Hvar , from 1863 to 1872, but these experiments were brought to a close by the hostility of the native fishermen. \n\nSchmidt built a reputation based upon a handbook of comparative anatomy , the 9th edition of which, by Arnold Lang , was issued under the title Lehrbuch der vergleichenden Anatomie der wirbellosen Tiere (1888–1894). He made significant contributions to Brehms Tierleben , and was the author of several treatises on sponges. The following are some of his principal writings:\n\nThis article about a German zoologist is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Leninism ( Russian : Ленинизм , Leninizm ) is a political ideology developed by Russian Marxist revolutionary Vladimir Lenin that proposes the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat led by a revolutionary vanguard party as the political prelude to the establishment of communism .\nLenin's ideological contributions to the Marxist ideology relate to his theories on the party , imperialism , the state , and revolution. The function of the Leninist vanguard party is to provide the working classes with the political consciousness (education and organisation) and revolutionary leadership necessary to depose capitalism . \n\nLeninist revolutionary leadership is based upon The Communist Manifesto (1848), identifying the communist party as \"the most advanced and resolute section of the working class parties of every country; that section which pushes forward all others.\" As the vanguard party, the Bolsheviks viewed history through the theoretical framework of dialectical materialism , which sanctioned political commitment to the successful overthrow of capitalism, and then to instituting socialism ; and, as the revolutionary national government, to realise the socio-economic transition by all means. \n\nIn the aftermath of the October Revolution in 1917, Leninism was the dominant version of Marxism in Russia. In establishing the dictatorship of the proletariat in Soviet Russia – with the 1917 Decree on Land , war communism (1918–1921) and the New Economic Policy (1921–1928) – the revolutionary régime suppressed most political opposition, including Marxists who opposed Lenin's actions, the anarchists and the Mensheviks , factions of the Socialist Revolutionary Party and the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries . The Russian Civil War (1917–1922), which included the fight against the White Army , Entente intervention , left-wing uprisings against the Bolsheviks and widespread peasant rebellions was an external and internal war which transformed Bolshevik Russia into the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic (RSFSR), the core and largest republic that founded the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). \n\nAs revolutionary praxis , Leninism originally was neither a proper philosophy nor a discrete political theory. Leninism comprises politico-economic developments of orthodox Marxism and Lenin's interpretations of Marxism, which function as a pragmatic synthesis for practical application to the actual conditions (political, social, economic) of the post- emancipation agrarian society of Imperial Russia in the early 20th century. As a political-science term, Lenin's theory of proletarian revolution entered common usage at the fifth congress of the Communist International (1924), when Grigory Zinoviev applied the term Leninism to denote \"vanguard-party revolution.\" Leninism was accepted as part of Russian Communist Party (b) 's vocabulary and doctrine around 1922, and in January 1923, despite objections from Lenin, it entered the public vocabulary. \n\nIn the 19th century, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels wrote the Manifesto of the Communist Party (1848), in which they called for the political unification of the European working classes in order to achieve communist revolution ; and proposed that because the socio-economic organisation of communism was of a higher form than that of capitalism , a workers' revolution first would occur in the industrialised countries. In Germany, Marxist social democracy was the political perspective of the Social Democratic Party of Germany , inspiring Russian Marxists, such as Lenin. \n\nIn the early 20th century, the socio-economic backwardness of Imperial Russia (1721–1917) — characterized by combined and uneven economic development — facilitated rapid and intensive industrialisation, which produced a united, working-class proletariat in a predominantly agrarian society. Moreover, because industrialisation was financed chiefly with foreign capital, Imperial Russia did not possess a revolutionary bourgeoisie with political and economic influence upon the workers and the peasants, as had been the case in the French Revolution (1789–1799) in the 18th century. Although Russia's political economy was agrarian and semi-feudal , the task of democratic revolution fell to the urban, industrial working class as the only social class capable of effecting land reform and democratisation, in view that the Russian bourgeoisie would suppress any revolution.\n\nIn the April Theses (1917), the political strategy of the October Revolution (7–8 November 1917), Lenin proposed that the Russian revolution was not an isolated national event but a fundamentally international event—the first socialist revolution in the world. Lenin's practical application of Marxism and proletarian revolution to the social, political, and economic conditions of agrarian Russia motivated and impelled the \"revolutionary nationalism of the poor\" to depose the absolute monarchy of the three-hundred-year dynasty of the House of Romanov (1613–1917), as tsars of Russia. \n\nIn Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916), Lenin's economic analyses indicated that capitalism would transform into a global financial system , by which industrialised countries exported financial capital to their colonies and so realise the exploitation of the labour of the natives and the exploitation of the natural resources of their countries. Such superexploitation allows wealthy countries to maintain a domestic labour aristocracy with a slightly higher standard of living than most workers, ensuring peaceful labour–capital relations in the capitalist homeland. Therefore, a proletarian revolution of workers and peasants could not occur in capitalist countries whilst the imperialist global-finance system remained in place. The first proletarian revolution would have to occur in an underdeveloped country, such as Imperial Russia, the politically weakest country in the capitalist global-finance system in the early 20th century. In the United States of Europe Slogan (1915), Lenin wrote:\n\nWorkers of the world, unite! —Uneven economic and political development is an absolute law of capitalism. Hence the victory of socialism is possible, first in several, or even in one capitalist country taken separately. The victorious proletariat of that country, having expropriated the capitalists and organised its own socialist production, would stand up against the rest of the world, the capitalist world.\n\nIn \"Left-Wing\" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920), Lenin wrote:\n\nThe more powerful enemy can be vanquished only by exerting the utmost effort, and by the most thorough, careful, attentive, skillful and obligatory use of any, even the smallest, rift between the enemies, any conflict of interests among the bourgeoisie of the various countries and among the various groups or types of bourgeoisie within the various countries, and also by taking advantage of any, even the smallest, opportunity of winning a mass ally, even though this ally is temporary, vacillating, unstable, unreliable and conditional. Those who do not understand this reveal a failure to understand even the smallest grain of Marxism, of modern scientific socialism in general. Those who have not proved in practice, over a fairly considerable period of time and in fairly varied political situations, their ability to apply this truth in practice have not yet learned to help the revolutionary class in its struggle to emancipate all toiling humanity from the exploiters. And this applies equally to the period before and after the proletariat has won political power.\n\nIn Chapter II, \"Proletarians and Communists\", of The Communist Manifesto (1848), Marx and Engels present the communist party as the political vanguard solely qualified to lead the proletariat in revolution:\n\nThe Communists, therefore, are, on the one hand, practically the most advanced and resolute section of the working-class parties of every country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding the lines of march, the conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian movement. The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all other proletarian parties: Formation of the proletariat into a class, overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of political power by the proletariat.\n\nThe revolutionary purpose of the Leninist vanguard party is to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat with the working class 's support. The communist party would lead the popular deposition of the Tsarist government and then transfer government power to the working class; that change of the ruling class—from the bourgeoisie to the proletariat —makes establishing socialism possible. In What Is To Be Done? (1902), Lenin said that a revolutionary vanguard party, recruited from the working class, should lead the political campaign because only in that way would the proletariat successfully realise their revolution; unlike the economic campaign of trade-union-struggle advocated by other socialist political parties and the anarcho-syndicalists . Like Marx, Lenin distinguished between the aspects of a revolution, the \"economic campaign\" ( labour strikes for increased wages and work concessions) that featured diffused plural leadership; and the \"political campaign\" (socialist changes to society), which required the decisive, revolutionary leadership of the Bolshevik vanguard party.\n\nBased upon the First International (IWA, International Workingmen's Association, 1864–1876), Lenin organised the Bolsheviks as a democratically centralised vanguard party; wherein free political speech was recognised as legitimate until policy consensus; afterwards, every member of the party was expected to abide by the agreed policy. Democratic debate was Bolshevik practice, even after Lenin banned factions among the Party in 1921. Despite being a guiding political influence, Lenin did not exercise absolute power and continually debated to have his points of view accepted as a course of revolutionary action. In Freedom to Criticise and Unity of Action (1905), Lenin said:\n\nOf course, the application of this principle in practice will sometimes give rise to disputes and misunderstandings; but only on the basis of this principle can all disputes and all misunderstandings be settled honourably for the Party. ... The principle of democratic centralism and autonomy for local Party organisations implies universal and full freedom to criticise, so long as this does not disturb the unity of a definite action; it rules out all criticism which disrupts or makes difficult the unity of an action decided on by the Party. \n\nBefore the October Revolution , despite supporting moderate political reform—including Bolsheviks elected to the Duma when opportune—Lenin said that capitalism could only be overthrown with proletarian revolution , not with gradual reforms—from within ( Fabianism ) and from without ( social democracy )—which would fail because the bourgeoisie's control of the means of production determined the nature of political power in Russia. As epitomised in the slogan \"For a Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and Peasantry\", a proletarian revolution in underdeveloped Russia required a united proletariat (peasants and industrial workers) to assume government power in the cities successfully. Moreover, owing to the middle-class aspirations of much of the peasantry, Leon Trotsky said that the proletarian leadership of the revolution would ensure truly socialist and democratic socio-economic change.\n\nIn Bolshevik Russia , government by direct democracy was realised and effected by the soviets (elected councils of workers), which Lenin said was the \"democratic dictatorship of the proletariat\" postulated in orthodox Marxism . The soviets comprised representative committees from the factories and the trade unions but excluded the capitalist social class to establish a proletarian government by and for the working class and the peasants. Concerning the political disenfranchisement of the capitalist social class in Bolshevik Russia, Lenin said that \"depriving the exploiters of the franchise is a purely Russian question, and not a question of the dictatorship of the proletariat, in general. ... In which countries ...democracy for the exploiters will be, in one or another form, restricted ...is a question of the specific national features of this or that capitalism.\" In chapter five of The State and Revolution (1917), Lenin describes the dictatorship of the proletariat as:\n\nthe organisation of the vanguard of the oppressed as the ruling class for the purpose of crushing the oppressors. ... An immense expansion of democracy, which, for the first time, becomes democracy for the poor, democracy for the people, and not democracy for the rich ... and suppression by force, i.e. exclusion from democracy, for the exploiters and oppressors of the people—this is the change which democracy undergoes during the 'transition' from capitalism to communism. \n\nConcerning the disenfranchisement from democracy of the capitalist social class, Lenin said: \"Democracy for the vast majority of the people, and suppression by force, i.e. exclusion from democracy, of the exploiters and oppressors of the people—this is the change democracy undergoes during the transition from capitalism to communism.\" The dictatorship of the proletariat was effected with soviet constitutionalism , a form of government opposite to the dictatorship of capital (privately owned means of production) practised in bourgeois democracies. Under soviet constitutionalism, the Leninist vanguard party would be one of many political parties competing for election to government power. Nevertheless, because of the Russian Civil War (1917–1924) and the anti-Bolshevik terrorism of opposing political parties aiding the White Armies' counter-revolution, the Bolshevik government banned all other political parties, which left the Leninist vanguard party as the only political party in Russia. Lenin said that such political suppression was not philosophically inherent to the dictatorship of the proletariat. \n\nThe Bolshevik government nationalised industry and established a foreign-trade monopoly to allow the productive coordination of the national economy and so prevent Russian national industries from competing against each other. To feed the populaces of town and country, Lenin instituted war communism (1918–1921) as a necessary condition—adequate supplies of food and weapons—for fighting the Russian Civil War . In March 1921, the New Economic Policy (NEP, 1921–1929) allowed limited local capitalism (private commerce and internal free trade) and replaced grain requisitions with an agricultural tax managed by state banks. The NEP was meant to resolve food-shortage riots by the peasantry and allowed limited private enterprise; the profit motive encouraged farmers to produce the crops required to feed town and country; and to economically re-establish the urban working class, who had lost many workers to fight the counter-revolutionary Civil War. The NEP nationalisation of the economy then would facilitate the industrialisation of Russia, politically strengthen the working class, and raise the standards of living for all Russians. Lenin said that the appearance of new socialist states was necessary for strengthening Russia's economy in establishing Russian socialism. Lenin's socio-economic perspective was supported by the German Revolution of 1918–1919 , the Italian insurrection and general strikes of 1920, and worker wage-riots in the UK, France, and the US.\n\nIn recognising and accepting nationalism among oppressed peoples, Lenin advocated their national right to self-determination and so opposed Russian chauvinism because such ethnocentrism was a cultural obstacle to establishing the dictatorship of the proletariat in every territory of the deposed Russian Empire (1721–1917). In The Right of Nations to Self-determination (1914), Lenin said:\n\nWe fight against the privileges and violence of the oppressor nation, and do not in any way condone strivings for privileges on the part of the oppressed nation. :... The bourgeois nationalism of any oppressed nation has a general democratic content that is directed against oppression, and it is this content that we unconditionally support. At the same time, we strictly distinguish it from the tendency towards national exclusiveness. ... Can a nation be free if it oppresses other nations? It cannot. \n\nThe socialist internationalism of Marxism and Bolshevism is based upon class struggle and a people's transcending nationalism, ethnocentrism , and religion—the intellectual obstacles to progressive class consciousness —which are the cultural status quo that the capitalist ruling class manipulates in order to divide the working classes and the peasant classes politically. To overcome that barrier to establishing socialism, Lenin said that acknowledging nationalism, as a people's right of self-determination and right of secession, naturally would allow socialist states to transcend the political limitations of nationalism to form a federation . In The Question of Nationalities, or 'Autonomisation' (1923), Lenin said:\n\n[N]othing holds up the development and strengthening of proletarian class solidarity so much as national injustice; \"offended\" nationals are not sensitive to anything, so much as to the feeling of equality, and the violation of this equality, if only through negligence or jest – to the violation of that equality by their proletarian comrades. \n\nThe role of the Leninist vanguard party was to politically educate the workers and peasants to dispel the societal false consciousness of religion and nationalism that constitute the cultural status quo taught by the bourgeoisie to the proletariat to facilitate their economic exploitation of peasants and workers. Influenced by Lenin, the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party stated that the development of the socialist workers' culture should not be \"hamstrung from above\" and opposed the Proletkult (1917–1925) organisational control of the national culture. \n\nIn post- Revolutionary Russia, the Stalinist application of Marxism–Leninism ( socialism in one country ), and Trotskyism ( permanent world revolution ) were the principal philosophies of communism that claimed legitimate ideological descent from Leninism; thus, within the Communist Party , each ideological faction denied the political legitimacy of the opposing faction. Until shortly before his death, Lenin countered Stalin's disproportionate political influence in the Communist Party and the bureaucracy of the Soviet government, partly because of abuses he had committed against the populace of Georgia and partly because the autocratic Stalin had accumulated administrative power disproportionate to his office of General Secretary of the Communist Party . [ page needed ]\n\nThe counter-action against Stalin aligned with Lenin's advocacy of the right of self-determination for the national and ethnic groups of the deposed Tsarist Empire . Lenin warned the Party that Stalin had \"unlimited authority concentrated in his hands, and I am not sure whether he will always be capable of using that authority with sufficient caution\" and formed a faction with Leon Trotsky to remove Stalin as the General Secretary of the Communist Party. \n\nTo that end followed proposals reducing the administrative powers of party posts to reduce bureaucratic influence upon the policies of the Communist Party. Lenin advised Trotsky to emphasise Stalin's recent bureaucratic alignment in such matters (e.g. undermining the anti-bureaucratic workers' and peasants' Inspection) and argued to depose Stalin as General Secretary. Despite advice to refuse \"any rotten compromise\", he did not heed Lenin's advice and General Secretary Stalin retained power over the Communist Party and the bureaucracy of the Soviet government. \n\nIn 1922, Lenin allied with Leon Trotsky against the party's growing bureaucratisation and the influence of Joseph Stalin . Lenin himself never mentioned the concept of \"Trotskyism\" after Trotsky became a member of the Bolshevik party but the term was employed by Stalin and the troika to present Trotsky's views as factional and anathematical to Leninist thought. \n\nAfter Lenin's death (21 January 1924), Trotsky ideologically battled the influence of Stalin, who formed ruling blocs within the Russian Communist Party (with Grigory Zinoviev and Lev Kamenev , then with Nikolai Bukharin and then by himself) and so determined soviet government policy from 1924 onwards. The ruling blocs continually denied Stalin's opponents the right to organise as an opposition faction within the party—thus, the reinstatement of democratic centralism and free speech within the Communist Party were key arguments of Trotsky's Left Opposition and the later Joint Opposition . \n\nIn instituting government policy, Stalin promoted the doctrine of socialism in one country (adopted 1925), wherein the Soviet Union would establish socialism upon Russia's economic foundations (and support socialist revolutions elsewhere). In a 1936 interview with journalist Roy W. Howard , Stalin articulated his rejection of world revolution and stated that “We never had such plans and intentions” and that “The export of revolution is nonsense”. \n\nConversely, Trotsky held that socialism in one country would economically constrain the industrial development of the Soviet Union and thus required assistance from the new socialist countries in the developed world—which was essential for maintaining soviet democracy—in 1924, much undermined by the Russian Civil War of White Army counter-revolution. Trotsky's theory of permanent revolution proposed that socialist revolutions in underdeveloped countries would further dismantle feudal régimes and establish socialist democracies that would not pass through a capitalist stage of development and government. Hence, revolutionary workers should ally politically with peasant political organisations, not capitalist political parties. In contrast, Stalin and his allies proposed that alliances with capitalist political parties were essential to realising a revolution where communists were too few. Said Stalinist practice failed, especially in the Northern Expedition portion of the Chinese Revolution (1926–1928), which resulted in the right-wing Kuomintang 's massacre of the Chinese Communist Party . Despite the failure, Stalin's policy of mixed-ideology political alliances nonetheless became Comintern 's policy.\n\nUntil exiled from Russia in 1929, Trotsky developed and led the Left Opposition (and the later Joint Opposition) with members of the Workers' Opposition , the Decembrists and (later) the Zinovievists. Trotskyism predominated the politics of the Left Opposition, which demanded the restoration of soviet democracy , the expansion of democratic centralism in the Communist Party, national industrialisation, international permanent revolution and socialist internationalism. According to historian Sheila Fitzpatrick , the scholarly consensus was that Stalin appropriated the position of the Left Opposition on such matters as industrialisation and collectivisation . \n\nThe Trotskyist demands countered Stalin's political dominance of the Communist Party, which was officially characterised by the \" cult of Lenin \", the rejection of permanent revolution, and advocated the doctrine of socialism in one country . The Stalinist economic policy vacillated between appeasing the capitalist interests of the kulak in the countryside and destroying them as a social class. Initially, the Stalinists also rejected the national industrialisation of Russia but then pursued it in full, sometimes brutally. In both cases, the Left Opposition denounced the regressive nature of Stalin's policy towards the wealthy kulak social class and the brutality of forced industrialisation. Trotsky described Stalinist vacillation as a symptom of the undemocratic nature of a ruling bureaucracy. \n\nDuring the 1920s and the 1930s, Stalin fought and defeated the political influence of Trotsky and the Trotskyists in Russia using slander, antisemitism , censorship , expulsions, exile (internal and external), and imprisonment. The anti-Trotsky campaign culminated in the executions (official and unofficial) of the Moscow Trials (1936–1938), which were part of the Great Purge of Old Bolsheviks who had led the Revolution. \n\nSome historians such as Richard Pipes consider Stalinism as the natural consequence of Leninism, that Stalin \"faithfully implemented Lenin's domestic and foreign policy programs\". Robert Service notes that \"institutionally and ideologically Lenin laid the foundations for a Stalin ... but the passage from Leninism to the worse terrors of Stalinism was not smooth and inevitable.\" Historian and Stalin biographer Edvard Radzinsky believes that Stalin was a genuine follower of Lenin, exactly as he claimed himself. Proponents of continuity cite a variety of contributory factors, in that it was Lenin, rather than Stalin, whose civil war measures introduced the Red Terror with its hostage-taking and internment camps ; that it was Lenin who developed the infamous Article 58 and who established the autocratic system within the Russian Communist Party . Proponents also note that Lenin put a ban on factions within the party and introduced the one-party state in 1921, a move that enabled Stalin to get rid of his rivals easily after Lenin's death and cite Felix Dzerzhinsky , who exclaimed during the Bolshevik struggle against opponents in the Russian Civil War : \"We stand for organized terror—this should be frankly stated.\" [ page needed ]\n\nSome scholars have had a differing view and attributed the establishment of the one-party system in the Soviet Union to the wartime conditions imposed on Lenin's government and others have highlighted the initial attempts to form a coalition government with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries . According to historian Marcel Liebman , Lenin's wartime measures such as banning opposition parties was prompted by the fact that several political parties either took up arms against the new Soviet government , or participated in sabotage, collaborated with the deposed Tsarists , or made assassination attempts against Lenin and other Bolshevik leaders. Liebman also argued that the banning of parties under Lenin did not have the same repressive character as later bans enforced under the Stalinist regime. Several scholars have highlighted the socially progressive nature of Lenin's policies such as universal education , universal healthcare and equal rights for women . Conversely, Stalin's regime reversed Lenin's policies on social matters such as sexual equality , legal restrictions on marriage , rights of sexual minorities and protective legislation . Historian Robert Vincent Daniels also viewed the Stalinist period as a counter-revolution in Soviet cultural life which revived patriotic propaganda , the Tsarist programme of Russification and traditional, military ranks which had been criticized by Lenin as expressions of \"Great Russian chauvinism\". Daniels also regarded Stalinism to represent an abrupt break with the Leninist period in terms of economic policies in which a deliberated, scientific system of economic planning that featured former Menshevik economists at Gosplan had been replaced with a hasty version of planning with unrealistic targets, bureaucratic waste, bottlenecks and shortages . \n\nRevisionist historians and some post–Cold War and otherwise dissident Soviet historians, including Roy Medvedev , argue that \"one could list the various measures carried out by Stalin that were actually a continuation of anti-democratic trends and measures implemented under Lenin\", but that \"in so many ways, Stalin acted, not in line with Lenin's clear instructions, but in defiance of them.\" [ page needed ] In doing so, some historians have tried to distance Stalinism from Leninism to undermine the totalitarian view that the negative facets of Stalin were inherent in communism from the start. [ page needed ] Critics include anti-Stalinist communists such as Leon Trotsky , who pointed out that Lenin attempted to persuade the Russian Communist Party to remove Stalin from his post as its General Secretary . Lenin's Testament , the document which contained this order, was suppressed after Lenin's death. Trotsky also argued that he and Lenin had intended to lift the ban on the opposition parties such as the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries as soon as the economic and social conditions of Soviet Russia had improved. Various historians have cited Lenin's proposal to appoint Trotsky as a Vice-chairman of the Soviet Union as evidence that he intended Trotsky to be his successor as head of government. In his biography of Trotsky, Polish-British historian Isaac Deutscher says that, on being faced with the evidence, \"only the blind and the deaf could be unaware of the contrast between Stalinism and Leninism.\" According to Stalin's secretary, Boris Bazhanov , Stalin was jubilant over Lenin's death while “publicly putting on the mask of grief”. French historian Pierre Broue disputed the historical assessments of the early Soviet Union by modern historians such as Dmitri Volkogonov in which he argued had falsely equated Leninism, Stalinism and Trotskyism to present the notion of ideological continuity and reinforce the position of counter-communism . Other revisionist historians, such as Orlando Figes , whilst critical of the Soviet era, acknowledge that Lenin had actively sought to counter the growing influence of Stalin through a number of actions such as his alliance with Trotsky in 1922–23, opposition to Stalin on foreign trade , the Georgian affair and proposed party reforms which included the democratisation of the Central Committee and recruitment of 50–100 ordinary workers into the lower organs of the party. \n\nNikita Khrushchev , Stalin's successor, argued that Stalin's regime differed profusely from the leadership of Lenin in his \" Secret Speech \", delivered in 1956. He was critical of the cult of the individual which was constructed around Stalin whereas Lenin stressed “the role of the people as the creator of history”. He also emphasized that Lenin favored a collective leadership which relied on personal persuasion and recommended the removal of Stalin from the position of General Secretary. Khrushchev contrasted this with the “despotism” of Stalin which require absolute submission to his position and he also highlighted that many of the people who were later annihilated as “enemies of the party\", \"had worked with Lenin during his life”. He also contrasted the “severe methods” used by Lenin in the “most necessary cases” as a “struggle for survival” during the Civil War with the extreme methods and mass repressions used by Stalin even when the Revolution was “already victorious”. In his memoirs, Khrushchev argued that Stalin's widespread purges of the \"most advanced nucleus of people\" among the Old Bolsheviks and leading figures in the military and scientific fields had \"undoubtedly\" weakened the nation. \n\nSome Marxist theoreticians have disputed the view that the Stalinist dictatorship was a natural outgrowth of the Bolsheviks' actions as most of the original central committee members from 1917 were later eliminated by Stalin. George Novack stressed the initial efforts by the Bolsheviks to form a government with the Left Socialist Revolutionaries and bring other parties such as the Mensheviks into political legality. Tony Cliff argued the Bolshevik-Left Socialist Revolutionary coalition government dissolved the democratically elected Russian Constituent Assembly due to a number of reasons. They cited the outdated voter-rolls which did not acknowledge the split among the Socialist Revolutionary party and the assemblies conflict with the Russian Congress of the Soviets as an alternative democratic structure. \n\nA similar analysis is present in more recent works such as those of Graeme Gill, who argues that \"[Stalinism was] not a natural flow-on of earlier developments; [it formed a] sharp break resulting from conscious decisions by leading political actors.\" However, Gill notes that \"difficulties with the use of the term reflect problems with the concept of Stalinism itself. The major difficulty is a lack of agreement about what should constitute Stalinism.\" Revisionist historians such as Sheila Fitzpatrick have criticized the focus on the upper levels of society and the use of Cold War concepts such as totalitarianism, obscuring the system's reality. \n\nRussian historian Vadim Rogovin stated that \"Under Lenin, the freedom to express a real variety of opinions existed in the party, and in carrying out political decisions, consideration was given to the positions of not only the majority, but a minority in the party\". He compared this practice with subsequent leadership blocs which violated party tradition, ignored proposals of opponents and expelled the Opposition from the party on falsified charges which culminated with the Moscow Trials of 1936–1938. According to Rogovin, 80-90% of the members of the Central Committee elected at the Sixth through to the Seventeenth Congresses were physically annihilated. \n\nThe Right Opposition and Left Opposition have been held by some scholars as representing political alternatives to Stalinism despite their shared beliefs in Leninism due to their policy platforms which were at variance with Stalin. This ranged from areas related to economics , foreign policy and cultural matters. \n\nAs a form of Marxism, revolutionary Leninism was criticised as an undemocratic interpretation of socialism . In The Nationalities Question in the Russian Revolution (1918), Rosa Luxemburg criticised the Bolsheviks for the suppression of the All Russian Constituent Assembly (January 1918); the partitioning of the feudal estates to the peasant communes; and the right of self-determination of every national people of the Russias. That the strategic (geopolitical) mistakes of the Bolsheviks would create significant dangers for the Russian Revolution , such as the bureaucratisation that would arise to administrate the large country that was Bolshevik Russia. In defence of the expedient revolutionary practice, in \"Left-Wing\" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920), Lenin dismissed the political and ideological complaints of the anti-Bolshevik critics, who claimed ideologically correct stances that were to the political left of Lenin. In Marxist philosophy, left communism is a range of left-wing political perspectives among communists. Left communism criticizes the Bolshevik Party 's ideology as the revolutionary vanguard. Ideologically, left communists present their perspectives and approaches as authentic Marxism and thus more oriented to the proletariat than the Leninism of the Communist International at their first (1919) and second (1920) congresses. Proponents of left communism include Amadeo Bordiga , Herman Gorter , Paul Mattick , Sylvia Pankhurst , Antonie Pannekoek and Otto Rühle . \n\nHistorically, the Dutch-German communist left has been most critical of Lenin and Leninism, yet the Italian communist left remained Leninist. Bordiga said: \"All this work of demolishing opportunism and 'deviationism' (Lenin: What Is To Be Done? ) is today the basis of party activity. The party follows revolutionary tradition and experiences in this work during these periods of revolutionary reflux and the proliferation of opportunist theories, which had as their violent and inflexible opponents Marx, Engels, Lenin, and the Italian Left.\" In The Lenin Legend (1935), Paul Mattick said that the council communist tradition, begun by the Dutch-German leftists, also is critical of Leninism. Contemporary left-communist organisations, such as the Internationalist Communist Tendency and the International Communist Current , view Lenin as an essential and influential theorist but remain critical of Leninism as political praxis for the proletarian revolution . \n\nNonetheless, the Bordigism of the International Communist Party abides Bordiga's strict Leninism. Ideologically aligned with the Dutch-German left, among the ideologists of contemporary communisation , the theorist Gilles Dauvé criticised Leninism as a \"by-product of Kautskyism \". In The Soviet Union Versus Socialism (1986), Noam Chomsky said that Stalinism was the logical development of Leninism and not an ideological deviation from Lenin's policies, which resulted in collectivisation enforced with a police state . In light of the tenets of socialism, Leninism was a right-wing deviation from Marxism. \n\nThe vanguard-party revolution of Leninism became the ideological basis of the communist parties in the socialist political spectrum. In the People's Republic of China, the Chinese Communist Party organised itself with Maoism (the Thought of Mao Zedong), socialism with Chinese characteristics . In Singapore, the People's Action Party (PAP) featured internal democracy and initiated single-party dominance in the government and politics of Singapore. In the event, the practical application of Maoism to the socio-economic conditions of Third World countries produced revolutionary vanguard parties, such as the Communist Party of Peru – Red Fatherland . \n\nSelected works by Vladimir Lenin\n\nHistories\n\nOther authors\n\nWorks by Vladimir Lenin\n\nOther thematic links",
  "An entrenched river , or entrenched stream is a river or stream that flows in a narrow trench or valley cut into a plain or relatively level upland. Because of lateral erosion streams flowing over gentle slopes over a time develops meandering (snake like pattern) course. Meanders form where gradient is very gentle, for example in floodplain and delta. Meandering is the feature of the middle and final course of the river. But very deep and wide meanders can also be found cutting hard rocks. Such meanders are called incised or entrenched meanders. The exception is that entrenched meanders are formed during the upliftment of land where river is young.\nThey widen and deepen over time and can be found as deep gorges or canyons in hard rock. In the case of an entrenched stream or river, it is often presumed that the watercourse has inherited its course by cutting down into bedrock from a pre-existing plain with little modification of the original course. The down-cutting of the river system could be the result not only of tectonic uplift but also of other factors such as river piracy, decrease of load, increase of runoff, extension of the drainage basin, or change in base level such as a fall in sea level. General, nongeneric terminology for either a river or stream that flows in a narrow trench or valley, for which evidence of a preexisting plain or relatively level upland can be either absent or present is either valley meander or meander valley with the latter term being preferred in literature. \n\nThe meanders that form part of either an entrenched river or meander valley are most commonly known as incised meanders . They are commonly classified as either an ingrown meander or an entrenched meander . For a long time, it was argued that ingrown meander occurs when downcutting process is slow and the river can cause lateral erosion , leading to an asymmetric valley . In addition, it was also argued for a long time that an entrenched meander forms when there is a rapid incision of the river bed such that the river does not have the opportunity to erode the lateral side. This leads to symmetrical valleys with a gorge -like appearance. However, more detailed studies have shown the development of ingrown meanders versus entrenched meanders depends on a complex mixture of factors such as bedrock lithology, tectonic activity, and climate. \n\nAs observed above, an entrenched river can be caused by either tectonic uplift in the area or when the lowering of the sea level occurs. It can also be caused by increased level of downcutting or a collapse of moraine -dammed lake downstream, or capture of the river by another river. Moreover, the process of river rejuvenation can also be the cause of river entrenchment , especially when the process has occurred due to tectonic uplift . River rejuvenation increases the power of the flowing water and, therefore, the process of erosion is accelerated.\n\nStudies show that tectonic movement , particularly movement associated with uplift , can influence spatial patterns of erosion and sedimentation . Although it is very difficult to offer detailed information of past tectonic activity, the basic temporal and spatial scale can show evidence of how this movement leads to the formation of an entrenched river. Various authors have used an entrenched river as evidence of tectonic movement in the past, and in this way they have proven the significant role of tectonic uplifts in the formation of an entrenched river. \n\nSeveral studies have cited incised meander a major feature of river entrenchment, as an impact of river rejuvenation. On the other hand, scholars argue that incised meanders and entrenched meanders are features formed before river rejuvenation. Incised meanders occur at the base of the river and they occur when the river base level has reduced, thus giving the river enough power for vertical erosion to take place. Some studies also indicate that anthropogenic factors such as clearing of vegetation , development of dams , and reservoir and urbanization are also causes of river entrenchment. For example, gravel mining along the Russian River developed the Middle Reach pit, which in turn led to the creation of the entrenched river. According to Posamentier, in the 1950s and 1980s, the Russian River had gravel pits and dry creek . However, over time the river has become entrenched due to mining (p. 1777). \n\nUrbanization and clearing of vegetation increase runoff water, which in turn increases water volume , especially during rainy seasons. Therefore, the increased level of vertical erosion of the river increases the power of the water, leading to erosion of the river. A study of San Pedro River and another river in the southwest have indicated that floods were the main cause of river entrenchment in the 18th century. The study shows that increased population and human activities in these places increased floods and, consequently, the volume of runoff water (Hereford 43). \n\nRosgen indicates that the consequences of incised meander are associated with accelerated stream bank erosion , land loss , aquatic habitat loss, as well as lowering the water table. Additionally, the study also found that incised meanders also cause loss of land productivity and downstream sedimentation (p. 2). The factors are likely to affect not only the economic development on the land where it passes but it is also very costly when restoration is to be initiated. river entrenchment happens because of the water having the power to cause erosion on the river bed. This increased velocity has shown a negative effect on the riparian habitat , because of increased erosion of the area. For example, a study by Simon revealed that channel incision is a major characteristic of entrenched rivers , and it affects variables in riparian vegetation and growth of fish in the areas (p. 528). Lowering of the channels means that the ground water level has also reduced. Specifically, the development of the entrenched river reduces the amount of ground water due to water loss through infiltration . The movement of the base level changes tributaries and the entrenchment of a tributary channel. Studies of various rivers have revealed that the process of river entrenchment has been associated with adjustment of river positions through bank erosion , as well as widening. \n\nRiver entrenchment causes negative impacts, such as accelerated stream bank erosion , land loss, loss of aquatic habitat , loss of land productivity, lowering of water table and sedimentation of the river downstream. However, in order to offset these problems, channel restoration measures focusing on restoration of the river in its original or to its previous characteristics are available. Though to achieve good results, a good understanding of the river patterns and profile of stable channels is a critical requirement. The process also needs an elaborate procedure to be followed to ensure all important factors and actions are followed. Numerous projects across the globe involving river restoration have been conducted, and a good example of such projects is Maggie Creek, Nevada . The project was completed in 1990 on upper Maggie Creek in Nevada . It was a partnership between the government and a private ranch, and the project entailed straightening of many miles of unstable gravel bed regarded as the C4/D4 type.",
  "Stump socks are tubular medical or clothing accessories with a blind end that are fashioned similar to socks , usually without a heel. They are worn on amputation stumps for a number of reasons. As stump socks are typically worn on body parts that do not contain a foot, their definition is distinct from the average sock type garment.\n\nAmputation stumps can be sensitive to cold or heat, particularly as their capacity to regulate tissue congestion is limited. The skin of amputation stumps can be very sensitive to allergic, chemical or mechanical irritation and thus may have to be protected.\n\nThere are different types of stump socks, some of which are available individually made to fit, some as industrially manufactured items:",
  "New Age is a range of spiritual or religious practices and beliefs that rapidly grew in Western society during the early 1970s. Its highly eclectic and unsystematic structure makes a precise definition difficult. Although many scholars consider it a religious movement, its adherents typically see it as spiritual or as a unification of mind, body, and spirit, and rarely use the term New Age themselves. Scholars often call it the New Age movement , although others contest this term and suggest it is better seen as a milieu or zeitgeist .\n\nAs a form of Western esotericism , the New Age drew heavily upon esoteric traditions such as the occultism of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, including the work of Emanuel Swedenborg and Franz Mesmer , as well as Spiritualism , New Thought , and Theosophy . More immediately, it arose from mid-20th century influences such as the UFO religions of the 1950s, the counterculture of the 1960s , and the Human Potential Movement . Its exact origins remain contested, but it became a major movement in the 1970s, at which time it was centered largely in the United Kingdom. It expanded widely in the 1980s and 1990s, in particular in the United States. By the start of the 21st century, the term New Age was increasingly rejected within this milieu, with some scholars arguing that the New Age phenomenon had ended.\n\nDespite its eclectic nature, the New Age has several main currents. Theologically , the New Age typically accepts a holistic form of divinity that pervades the universe, including human beings themselves, leading to a strong emphasis on the spiritual authority of the self. This is accompanied by a common belief in a variety of semi-divine non-human entities such as angels , with whom humans can communicate, particularly by channeling through a human intermediary. Typically viewing history as divided into spiritual ages, a common New Age belief is in a forgotten age of great technological advancement and spiritual wisdom, declining into periods of increasing violence and spiritual degeneracy, which will now be remedied by the emergence of an Age of Aquarius , from which the milieu gets its name. There is also a strong focus on healing, particularly using forms of alternative medicine , and an emphasis on unifying science with spirituality.\n\nThe dedication of New Agers varied considerably, from those who adopted a number of New Age ideas and practices to those who fully embraced and dedicated their lives to it. The New Age has generated criticism from Christians as well as modern Pagan and Indigenous communities . From the 1990s onward, the New Age became the subject of research by academic scholars of religious studies .\n\nOne of the few things on which all scholars agree concerning New Age is that it is difficult to define. Often, the definition given actually reflects the background of the scholar giving the definition. Thus, the New Ager views New Age as a revolutionary period of history dictated by the stars; the Christian apologist has often defined new age as a cult; the historian of ideas understands it as a manifestation of the perennial tradition; the philosopher sees New Age as a monistic or holistic worldview; the sociologist describes New Age as a new religious movement (NRM); while the psychologist describes it as a form of narcissism.\n\nThe New Age phenomenon has proved difficult to define, with much scholarly disagreement as to its scope. The scholars Steven J. Sutcliffe and Ingvild Sælid Gilhus have even suggested that it remains \"among the most disputed of categories in the study of religion\". \n\nThe scholar of religion Paul Heelas characterised the New Age as \"an eclectic hotch-potch of beliefs, practices, and ways of life\" that can be identified as a singular phenomenon through their use of \"the same (or very similar) lingua franca to do with the human (and planetary) condition and how it can be transformed .\" Similarly, the historian of religion Olav Hammer termed it \"a common denominator for a variety of quite divergent contemporary popular practices and beliefs\" that have emerged since the late 1970s and are \"largely united by historical links, a shared discourse and an air de famille \". According to Hammer, this New Age was a \"fluid and fuzzy cultic milieu\". The sociologist of religion Michael York described the New Age as \"an umbrella term that includes a great variety of groups and identities\" that are united by their \"expectation of a major and universal change being primarily founded on the individual and collective development of human potential.\" \n\nThe scholar of religion Wouter Hanegraaff adopted a different approach by asserting that \"New Age\" was \"a label attached indiscriminately to whatever seems to fit it\" and that as a result it \"means very different things to different people\". He thus argued against the idea that the New Age could be considered \"a unified ideology or Weltanschauung \", although he believed that it could be considered a \"more or less unified 'movement'.\" Other scholars have suggested that the New Age is too diverse to be a singular movement . The scholar of religion George D. Chryssides called it \"a counter-cultural Zeitgeist \", while the sociologist of religion Steven Bruce suggested that New Age was a milieu ; Heelas and scholar of religion Linda Woodhead called it the \"holistic milieu\". \n\nThere is no central authority within the New Age phenomenon that can determine what counts as New Age and what does not. Many of those groups and individuals who could analytically be categorised as part of the New Age reject the term New Age in reference to themselves. Some even express active hostility to the term. Rather than terming themselves New Agers , those involved in this milieu commonly describe themselves as spiritual \"seekers\", and some self-identify as a member of a different religious group, such as Christianity, Judaism, or Buddhism. In 2003 Sutcliffe observed that the use of the term New Age was \"optional, episodic and declining overall\", adding that among the very few individuals who did use it, they usually did so with qualification, for instance by placing it in quotation marks. Other academics, such as Sara MacKian, have argued that the sheer diversity of the New Age renders the term too problematic for scholars to use. MacKian proposed \"everyday spirituality\" as an alternate term. \n\nWhile acknowledging that New Age was a problematic term, the scholar of religion James R. Lewis stated that it remained a useful etic category for scholars to use because \"There exists no comparable term which covers all aspects of the movement.\" Similarly, Chryssides argued that the fact that \"New Age\" is a \"theoretical concept\" does not \"undermine its usefulness or employability\"; he drew comparisons with \" Hinduism \", a similar \"Western etic piece of vocabulary\" that scholars of religion used despite its problems. \n\nIn discussing the New Age, academics have varyingly referred to \"New Age spirituality\" and \"New Age religion\". Those involved in the New Age rarely consider it to be \"religion\"—negatively associating that term solely with organized religion —and instead describe their practices as \"spirituality\". Religious studies scholars, however, have repeatedly referred to the New Age milieu as a \"religion\". York described the New Age as a new religious movement (NRM). Conversely, both Heelas and Sutcliffe rejected this categorisation; Heelas believed that while elements of the New Age represented NRMs, this did not apply to every New Age group. Similarly, Chryssides stated that the New Age could not be seen as \"a religion\" in itself. \n\nThe New Age movement is the cultic milieu having become conscious of itself, in the later 1970s, as constituting a more or less unified \"movement\". All manifestations of this movement are characterized by a popular western culture criticism expressed in terms of a secularized esotericism.\n\nThe New Age is also a form of Western esotericism . Hanegraaff regarded the New Age as a form of \"popular culture criticism\", in that it represented a reaction against the dominant Western values of Judeo-Christian religion and rationalism, adding that \"New Age religion formulates such criticism not at random, but falls back on\" the ideas of earlier Western esoteric groups. \n\nThe New Age has also been identified by various scholars of religion as part of the cultic milieu. This concept, developed by the sociologist Colin Campbell, refers to a social network of marginalized ideas. Through their shared marginalization within a given society, these disparate ideas interact and create new syntheses. \n\nHammer identified much of the New Age as corresponding to the concept of \" folk religions \" in that it seeks to deal with existential questions regarding subjects like death and disease in \"an unsystematic fashion, often through a process of bricolage from already available narratives and rituals\". York also heuristically divides the New Age into three broad trends. The first, the social camp , represents groups that primarily seek to bring about social change, while the second, the occult camp , instead focus on contact with spirit entities and channeling. York's third group, the spiritual camp , represents a middle ground between these two camps that focuses largely on individual development . \n\nThe term new age , along with related terms like new era and new world , long predate the emergence of the New Age movement, and have widely been used to assert that a better way of life for humanity is dawning. It occurs commonly, for instance, in political contexts; the Great Seal of the United States , designed in 1782, proclaims a \"new order of ages\", while in the 1980s the Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev proclaimed that \"all mankind is entering a new age\". [ need quotation to verify ] The term has also appeared within Western esoteric schools of thought, having a scattered use from the mid-nineteenth century onward. In 1864 the American Swedenborgian Warren Felt Evans published The New Age and its Message , while in 1907 Alfred Orage and Holbrook Jackson began editing a weekly journal of Christian liberalism and socialism titled The New Age . The concept of a coming \"new age\" that would be inaugurated by the return to Earth of Jesus Christ was a theme in the poetry of Wellesley Tudor Pole (1884–1968) and of Johanna Brandt (1876–1964), and then also appeared in the work of the British-born American Theosophist Alice Bailey (1880–1949), featuring in titles such as Discipleship in the New Age (1944) and Education in the New Age (1954). \n\nBetween the 1930s and 1960s a small number of groups and individuals became preoccupied with the concept of a coming \"New Age\" and used the term accordingly. The term had thus become a recurring motif in the esoteric spirituality milieu. Sutcliffe, therefore, expressed the view that while the term New Age had originally been an \"apocalyptic emblem\", it would only be later that it became \"a tag or codeword for a 'spiritual' idiom\". \n\nAccording to scholar Nevill Drury , the New Age has a \"tangible history\", although Hanegraaff expressed the view that most New Agers were \"surprisingly ignorant about the actual historical roots of their beliefs\". Similarly, Hammer thought that \"source amnesia\" was a \"building block of a New Age worldview\", with New Agers typically adopting ideas with no awareness of where those ideas originated. \n\nAs a form of Western esotericism, the New Age has antecedents that stretch back to southern Europe in Late Antiquity . Following the Age of Enlightenment in 18th-century Europe, new esoteric ideas developed in response to the development of scientific rationality. Scholars call this new esoteric trend occultism , and this occultism was a key factor in the development of the worldview from which the New Age emerged. \n\nOne of the earliest influences on the New Age was the Swedish 18th-century Christian mystic Emanuel Swedenborg , who professed the ability to communicate with angels, demons, and spirits. Swedenborg's attempt to unite science and religion and his prediction of a coming era in particular have been cited as ways that he prefigured the New Age. Another early influence was the late 18th and early 19th century German physician and hypnotist Franz Mesmer , who wrote about the existence of a force known as \" animal magnetism \" running through the human body. The establishment of Spiritualism , an occult religion influenced by both Swedenborgianism and Mesmerism, in the U.S. during the 1840s has also been identified as a precursor to the New Age, in particular through its rejection of established Christianity, representing itself as a scientific approach to religion, and its emphasis on channeling spirit entities. \n\nMost of the beliefs which characterise the New Age were already present by the end of the 19th century, even to such an extent that one may legitimately wonder whether the New Age brings anything new at all.\n\nA further major influence on the New Age was the Theosophical Society , an occult group co-founded by the Russian Helena Blavatsky in the late 19th century. In her books Isis Unveiled (1877) and The Secret Doctrine (1888), Blavatsky wrote that her Society was conveying the essence of all world religions, and it thus emphasized a focus on comparative religion . Serving as a partial bridge between Theosophical ideas and those of the New Age was the American esotericist Edgar Cayce , who founded the Association for Research and Enlightenment . Another partial bridge was the Danish mystic Martinus who is popular in Scandinavia. \n\nAnother influence was New Thought , which developed in late nineteenth-century New England as a Christian-oriented healing movement before spreading throughout the United States. Another influence was the psychologist Carl Jung . Drury also identified as an important influence upon the New Age the Indian Swami Vivekananda , an adherent of the philosophy of Vedanta who first brought Hinduism to the West in the late 19th century. \n\nHanegraaff believed that the New Age's direct antecedents could be found in the UFO religions of the 1950s, which he termed a \"proto-New Age movement\". Many of these new religious movements had strong apocalyptic beliefs regarding a coming new age, which they typically asserted would be brought about by contact with extraterrestrials. Examples of such groups included the Aetherius Society , founded in the UK in 1955, and the Heralds of the New Age, established in New Zealand in 1956. \n\nFrom a historical perspective, the New Age phenomenon is most associated with the counterculture of the 1960s . According to author Andrew Grant Jackson, George Harrison 's adoption of Hindu philosophy and Indian instrumentation in his songs with the Beatles in the mid-1960s, together with the band's highly publicised study of Transcendental Meditation , \"truly kick-started\" the Human Potential Movement that subsequently became New Age. Although not common throughout the counterculture, usage of the terms New Age and Age of Aquarius —used in reference to a coming era—were found within it, for instance appearing on adverts for the Woodstock festival of 1969, and in the lyrics of \" Aquarius \", the opening song of the 1967 musical Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical . This decade also witnessed the emergence of a variety of new religious movements and newly established religions in the United States, creating a spiritual milieu from which the New Age drew upon; these included the San Francisco Zen Center , Transcendental Meditation, Soka Gakkai , the Inner Peace Movement, the Church of All Worlds , and the Church of Satan . Although there had been an established interest in Asian religious ideas in the U.S. from at least the eighteenth-century, many of these new developments were variants of Hinduism, Buddhism , and Sufism , which had been imported to the West from Asia following the U.S. government's decision to rescind the Asian Exclusion Act in 1965. In 1962 the Esalen Institute was established in Big Sur , California . Esalen and similar personal growth centers had developed links to humanistic psychology , and from this, the human potential movement emerged and strongly influenced the New Age. \n\nIn Britain, a number of small religious groups that came to be identified as the \"light\" movement had begun declaring the existence of a coming new age, influenced strongly by the Theosophical ideas of Blavatsky and Bailey. The most prominent of these groups was the Findhorn Foundation , which founded the Findhorn Ecovillage in the Scottish area of Findhorn , Moray in 1962. Although its founders were from an older generation, Findhorn attracted increasing numbers of countercultural baby boomers during the 1960s, to the extent that its population had grown sixfold to c. 120 residents by 1972. In October 1965, the co-founder of Findhorn Foundation, Peter Caddy , a former member of the occult Rosicrucian Order Crotona Fellowship , attended a meeting of various figures within Britain's esoteric milieu; advertised as \"The Significance of the Group in the New Age\", it was held at Attingham Park over the course of a weekend. \n\nAll of these groups created the backdrop from which the New Age movement emerged. As James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton point out, the New Age phenomenon represents \"a synthesis of many different preexisting movements and strands of thought\". Nevertheless, York asserted that while the New Age bore many similarities with both earlier forms of Western esotericism and Asian religion, it remained \"distinct from its predecessors in its own self-consciousness as a new way of thinking\". \n\nThe late 1950s saw the first stirrings within the cultic milieu of a belief in a coming new age. A variety of small movements arose, revolving around revealed messages from beings in space and presenting a synthesis of post-Theosophical and other esoteric doctrines. These movements might have remained marginal, had it not been for the explosion of the counterculture in the 1960s and early 1970s. Various historical threads ... began to converge: nineteenth century doctrinal elements such as Theosophy and post-Theosophical esotericism as well as harmonious or positive thinking were now eclectically combined with ... religious psychologies: transpersonal psychology, Jungianism and a variety of Eastern teachings. It became perfectly feasible for the same individuals to consult the I Ching, practice Jungian astrology, read Abraham Maslow's writings on peak experiences, etc. The reason for the ready incorporation of such disparate sources was a similar goal of exploring an individualized and largely non-Christian religiosity.\n\nBy the early 1970s, use of the term New Age was increasingly common within the cultic milieu. This was because—according to Sutcliffe—the \"emblem\" of the \"New Age\" had been passed from the \"subcultural pioneers\" in groups like Findhorn to the wider array of \"countercultural baby boomers\" between c. 1967 and 1974. He noted that as this happened, the meaning of the term New Age changed; whereas it had once referred specifically to a coming era, at this point it came to be used in a wider sense to refer to a variety of spiritual activities and practices. In the latter part of the 1970s, the New Age expanded to cover a wide variety of alternative spiritual and religious beliefs and practices, not all of which explicitly held to the belief in the Age of Aquarius, but were nevertheless widely recognized as broadly similar in their search for \"alternatives\" to mainstream society. In doing so, the \"New Age\" became a banner under which to bring together the wider \"cultic milieu\" of American society. \n\nThe counterculture of the 1960s had rapidly declined by the start of the 1970s, in large part due to the collapse of the commune movement, but it would be many former members of the counter-culture and hippie subculture who subsequently became early adherents of the New Age movement. The exact origins of the New Age movement remain an issue of debate; Melton asserted that it emerged in the early 1970s, whereas Hanegraaff instead traced its emergence to the latter 1970s, adding that it then entered its full development in the 1980s. This early form of the movement was based largely in Britain and exhibited a strong influence from theosophy and Anthroposophy . Hanegraaff termed this early core of the movement the New Age sensu stricto , or \"New Age in the strict sense\". \n\nHanegraaff terms the broader development the New Age sensu lato , or \"New Age in the wider sense\". Stores that came to be known as \"New Age shops\" opened up, selling related books, magazines, jewelry, and crystals, and they were typified by the playing of New Age music and the smell of incense. This probably influenced several thousand small metaphysical book- and gift-stores that increasingly defined themselves as \"New Age bookstores\", while New Age titles came to be increasingly available from mainstream bookstores and then websites like Amazon.com . \n\nNot everyone who came to be associated with the New Age phenomenon openly embraced the term New Age , although it was popularised in books like David Spangler 's 1977 work Revelation: The Birth of a New Age and Mark Satin 's 1979 book New Age Politics: Healing Self and Society . Marilyn Ferguson 's 1982 book The Aquarian Conspiracy has also been regarded as a landmark work in the development of the New Age, promoting the idea that a new era was emerging. Other terms that were employed synonymously with New Age in this milieu included \"Green\", \"Holistic\", \"Alternative\", and \"Spiritual\". \n\n1971 witnessed the foundation of est by Werner H. Erhard , a transformational training course that became a part of the early movement. Melton suggested that the 1970s witnessed the growth of a relationship between the New Age movement and the older New Thought movement, as evidenced by the widespread use of Helen Schucman 's A Course in Miracles (1975), New Age music, and crystal healing in New Thought churches. Some figures in the New Thought movement were skeptical, challenging the compatibility of New Age and New Thought perspectives. During these decades, Findhorn had become a site of pilgrimage for many New Agers, and greatly expanded in size as people joined the community, with workshops and conferences being held there that brought together New Age thinkers from across the world. \n\nSeveral key events occurred, which raised public awareness of the New Age subculture: publication of Linda Goodman 's best-selling astrology books Sun Signs (1968) and Love Signs (1978); the release of Shirley MacLaine 's book Out on a Limb (1983), later adapted into a television mini-series with the same name (1987); and the \" Harmonic Convergence \" planetary alignment on August 16 and 17, 1987, organized by José Argüelles in Sedona, Arizona . The Convergence attracted more people to the movement than any other single event. Heelas suggested that the movement was influenced by the \"enterprise culture\" encouraged by the U.S. and U.K. governments during the 1980s onward, with its emphasis on initiative and self-reliance resonating with any New Age ideas. \n\nChannelers Jane Roberts ( Seth Material ), Helen Schucman ( A Course in Miracles ), J. Z. Knight ( Ramtha ), Neale Donald Walsch ( Conversations with God ) contributed to the movement's growth. The first significant exponent of the New Age movement in the U.S. has been cited as Ram Dass . Core works in the propagating of New Age ideas included Jane Roberts's Seth series, published from 1972 onward, Helen Schucman's 1975 publication A Course in Miracles , and James Redfield 's 1993 work The Celestine Prophecy . A number of these books became best sellers , such as the Seth book series which quickly sold over a million copies. Supplementing these books were videos, audiotapes, compact discs and websites. The development of the internet in particular further popularized New Age ideas and made them more widely accessible. \n\nNew Age ideas influenced the development of rave culture in the late 1980s and 1990s. In Britain during the 1980s, the term New Age Travellers came into use, although York characterised this term as \"a misnomer created by the media\". These New Age Travellers had little to do with the New Age as the term was used more widely, with scholar of religion Daren Kemp observing that \"New Age spirituality is not an essential part of New Age Traveller culture, although there are similarities between the two worldviews\". The term New Age came to be used increasingly widely by the popular media in the 1990s. \n\nBy the late 1980s, some publishers dropped the term New Age as a marketing device. In 1994, the scholar of religion Gordon J. Melton presented a conference paper in which he argued that, given that he knew of nobody describing their practices as \"New Age\" anymore, the New Age had died. In 2001, Hammer observed that the term New Age had increasingly been rejected as either pejorative or meaningless by individuals within the Western cultic milieu. He also noted that within this milieu it was not being replaced by any alternative and that as such a sense of collective identity was being lost. \n\nOther scholars disagreed with Melton's idea; in 2004 Daren Kemp stated that \"New Age is still very much alive\". Hammer himself stated that \"the New Age movement may be on the wane, but the wider New Age religiosity ... shows no sign of disappearing\". MacKian suggested that the New Age \"movement\" had been replaced by a wider \"New Age sentiment\" which had come to pervade \"the socio-cultural landscape\" of Western countries. Its diffusion into the mainstream may have been influenced by the adoption of New Age concepts by high-profile figures: U.S. First Lady Nancy Reagan consulted an astrologer, British Princess Diana visited spirit mediums, and Norwegian Princess Märtha Louise established a school devoted to communicating with angels. New Age shops continued to operate, although many have been remarketed as \"Mind, Body, Spirit\". \n\nIn 2015, the scholar of religion Hugh Urban argued that New Age spirituality is growing in the United States and can be expected to become more visible: \"According to many recent surveys of religious affiliation, the 'spiritual but not religious' category is one of the fastest-growing trends in American culture, so the New Age attitude of spiritual individualism and eclecticism may well be an increasingly visible one in the decades to come\". \n\nAustralian scholar Paul J. Farrelly, in his 2017 doctoral dissertation at Australian National University , argued that, while the term New Age may become less popular in the West, it is actually booming in Taiwan , where it is regarded as something comparatively new and is being exported from Taiwan to the Mainland China , where it is more or less tolerated by the authorities. \n\nThe New Age places strong emphasis on the idea that the individual and their own experiences are the primary source of authority on spiritual matters. It exhibits what Heelas termed \"unmediated individualism\", and reflects a world-view that is \"radically democratic\". It places an emphasis on the freedom and autonomy of the individual. This emphasis has led to ethical disagreements; some New Agers believe helping others is beneficial, although another view is that doing so encourages dependency and conflicts with a reliance on the self. Nevertheless, within the New Age, there are differences in the role accorded to voices of authority outside of the self. Hammer stated that \"a belief in the existence of a core or true Self\" is a \"recurring theme\" in New Age texts. The concept of \" personal growth \" is also greatly emphasised among New Agers, while Heelas noted that \"for participants spirituality is life-itself\". \n\nNew Age religiosity is typified by its eclecticism. Generally believing that there is no one true way to pursue spirituality, New Agers develop their own worldview \"by combining bits and pieces to form their own individual mix\", seeking what Drury called \"a spirituality without borders or confining dogmas\". The anthropologist David J. Hess noted that in his experience, a common attitude among New Agers was that \"any alternative spiritual path is good because it is spiritual and alternative\". This approach that has generated a common jibe that New Age represents \"supermarket spirituality\". York suggested that this eclecticism stemmed from the New Age's origins within late modern capitalism, with New Agers subscribing to a belief in a free market of spiritual ideas as a parallel to a free market in economics. \n\nAs part of its eclecticism, the New Age draws ideas from many different cultural and spiritual traditions from across the world, often legitimising this approach by reference to \"a very vague claim\" about underlying global unity. Certain societies are more usually chosen over others; examples include the ancient Celts, ancient Egyptians, the Essenes , Atlanteans , and ancient extraterrestrials. As noted by Hammer: \"to put it bluntly, no significant spokespersons within the New Age community claim to represent ancient Albanian wisdom, simply because beliefs regarding ancient Albanians are not part of our cultural stereotypes\". According to Hess, these ancient or foreign societies represent an exotic \"Other\" for New Agers, who are predominantly white Westerners. \n\nA belief in divinity is integral to New Age ideas, although understandings of this divinity vary. New Age theology exhibits an inclusive and universalistic approach that accepts all personal perspectives on the divine as equally valid. This intentional vagueness as to the nature of divinity also reflects the New Age idea that divinity cannot be comprehended by the human mind or language. New Age literature nevertheless displays recurring traits in its depiction of the divine: the first is the idea that it is holistic , thus frequently being described with such terms as an \"Ocean of Oneness\", \"Infinite Spirit\", \"Primal Stream\", \"One Essence\", and \"Universal Principle\". A second trait is the characterisation of divinity as \"Mind\", \"Consciousness\", and \"Intelligence\", while a third is the description of divinity as a form of \" energy \". A fourth trait is the characterisation of divinity as a \"life force\", the essence of which is creativity, while a fifth is the concept that divinity consists of love . \n\nMost New Age groups believe in an Ultimate Source from which all things originate, which is usually conflated with the divine. Various creation myths have been articulated in New Age publications outlining how this Ultimate Source created the universe and everything in it. In contrast, some New Agers emphasize the idea of a universal inter-relatedness that is not always emanating from a single source. The New Age worldview emphasises holism and the idea that everything in existence is intricately connected as part of a single whole, in doing so rejecting both the dualism of the Christian division of matter and spirit and the reductionism of Cartesian science. A number of New Agers have linked this holistic interpretation of the universe to the Gaia hypothesis of James Lovelock . The idea of holistic divinity results in a common New Age belief that humans themselves are divine in essence, a concept described using such terms as \"droplet of divinity\", \"inner Godhead\", and \"divine self\". Influenced by Theosophical and Anthroposophical ideas regarding ' subtle bodies ', a common New Age idea holds to the existence of a Higher Self that is a part of the human but connects with the divine essence of the universe, and which can advise the human mind through intuition . \n\nCosmogonical creation stories are common in New Age sources, with these accounts reflecting the movement's holistic framework by describing an original, primal oneness from which all things in the universe emanated. An additional common theme is that human souls—once living in a spiritual world—then descended into a world of matter. The New Age movement typically views the material universe as a meaningful illusion, which humans should try to use constructively rather than focus on escaping into other spiritual realms. This physical world is hence seen as \"a domain for learning and growth\" after which the human soul might pass on to higher levels of existence. There is thus a widespread belief that reality is engaged in an ongoing process of evolution; rather than Darwinian evolution , this is typically seen as either a teleological evolution which assumes a process headed to a specific goal or an open-ended, creative evolution. \n\nIn the flood of channeled material which has been published or delivered to \"live\" audiences in the last two decades, there is much indeed that is trivial, contradictory, and confusing. The authors of much of this material make claims that, while not necessarily untrue or fraudulent, are difficult or impossible for the reader to verify. A number of other channeled documents address issues more immediately relevant to the human condition. The best of these writings are not only coherent and plausible, but eloquently persuasive and sometimes disarmingly moving.\n\nA conduit , in esoterism , and spiritual discourse, is a specific object, person, location, or process (such as engaging in a séance or entering a trance , or using psychedelic medicines ) which allows a person to connect or communicate with a spiritual realm , metaphysical energy , or spiritual entity , or vice versa. The use of such a conduit may be entirely metaphoric or symbolic, or it may be earnestly believed to be functional.\n\nMacKian argued that a central, but often overlooked, element of the phenomenon was an emphasis on \"spirit\", and in particular participants' desire for a relationship with spirit. Many practitioners in her UK-focused study described themselves as \"workers for spirit\", expressing the desire to help people learn about spirit. They understood various material signs as marking the presence of spirit, for instance, the unexpected appearance of a feather. New Agers often call upon this spirit to assist them in everyday situations, for instance, to ease the traffic flow on their way to work. \n\nNew Age literature often refers to benevolent non-human spirit-beings who are interested in humanity's spiritual development; these are variously referred to as angels, guardian angels , personal guides, masters, teachers, and contacts. New Age angelology is nevertheless unsystematic, reflecting the idiosyncrasies of individual authors. The figure of Jesus Christ is often mentioned within New Age literature as a mediating principle between divinity and humanity, as well as an exemplar of a spiritually advanced human being. \n\nAlthough not present in every New Age group, a core belief within the milieu is in channeling. This is the idea that humans beings, sometimes (although not always) in a state of trance , can act \"as a channel of information from sources other than their normal selves\". These sources are varyingly described as being God , gods and goddesses , ascended masters , spirit guides , extraterrestrials , angels , devas , historical figures, the collective unconscious , elementals , or nature spirits . Hanegraaff described channeling as a form of \"articulated revelation\", and identified four forms: trance channeling, automatisms, clairaudient channeling, and open channeling. \n\nA notable channeler in the early 1900s was Rose Edith Kelly , wife of the English occultist and ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley (1875–1947). She allegedly channeled the voice of a non-physical entity named Aiwass during their honeymoon in Cairo , Egypt (1904). Others purport to channel spirits from \"future dimensions\", ascended masters, or, in the case of the trance mediums of the Brahma Kumaris , God. Another channeler in the early 1900s was Edgar Cayce , who said that he was able to channel his higher self while in a trance-like state.\n\nIn the later half of the 20th century, Western mediumship developed in two different ways. One type involves clairaudience , in which the medium is said to hear spirits and relay what they hear to their clients. The other is a form of channeling in which the channeler seemingly goes into a trance, and purports to leave their body allowing a spirit entity to borrow it and then speak through them. When in a trance the medium appears to enter into a cataleptic state, although modern channelers may not. [ citation needed ] Some channelers open the eyes when channeling, and remain able to walk and behave normally. The rhythm and the intonation of the voice may also change completely. \n\nExamples of New Age channeling include Jane Roberts' belief that she was contacted by an entity called Seth, and Helen Schucman's belief that she had channeled Jesus Christ. The academic Suzanne Riordan examined a variety of these New Age channeled messages, noting that they typically \"echoed each other in tone and content\", offering an analysis of the human condition and giving instructions or advice for how humanity can discover its true destiny. For many New Agers, these channeled messages rival the scriptures of the main world religions as sources of spiritual authority, although often New Agers describe historical religious revelations as forms of \"channeling\" as well, thus attempting to legitimate and authenticate their own contemporary practices. Although the concept of channeling from discarnate spirit entities has links to Spiritualism and psychical research , the New Age does not feature Spiritualism's emphasis on proving the existence of life after death, nor psychical research's focus of testing mediums for consistency. \n\nOther New Age channels include: [ better source needed ]\n\nNew Age thought typically envisions the world as developing through cosmological cycles that can be identified astrologically . It adopts this concept from Theosophy, although often presents it in a looser and more eclectic way than is found in Theosophical teaching. New Age literature often proposes that humanity once lived in an age of spiritual wisdom. In the writings of New Agers like Edgar Cayce, the ancient period of spiritual wisdom is associated with concepts of supremely-advanced societies living on lost continents such as Atlantis, Lemuria , and Mu , as well as the idea that ancient societies like those of Ancient Egypt were far more technologically advanced than modern scholarship accepts. New Age literature often posits that the ancient period of spiritual wisdom gave way to an age of spiritual decline, sometimes termed the Age of Pisces . Although characterised as being a negative period for humanity, New Age literature views the Age of Pisces as an important learning experience for the species. Hanegraaff stated that New Age perceptions of history were \"extremely sketchy\" in their use of description, reflecting little interest in historiography and conflating history with myth . He also noted that they were highly ethnocentric in placing Western civilization at the centre of historical development. \n\nA common belief among the New Age is that humanity has entered, or is coming to enter, a new period known as the Age of Aquarius , which Melton has characterised as a \"New Age of love, joy, peace, abundance, and harmony[...] the Golden Age heretofore only dreamed about.\" In accepting this belief in a coming new age, the milieu has been described as \"highly positive, celebratory, [and] utopian\", and has also been cited as an apocalyptic movement . Opinions about the nature of the coming Age of Aquarius differ among New Agers. There are for instance differences in belief about its commencement; New Age author David Spangler wrote that it began in 1967, others placed its beginning with the Harmonic Convergence of 1987, author José Argüelles predicted its start in 2012 , and some believe that it will not begin until several centuries into the third millennium. \n\nThere are also differences in how this new age is envisioned. Those adhering to what Hanegraaff termed the \"moderate\" perspective believed that it would be marked by an improvement to current society, which affected both New Age concerns—through the convergence of science and mysticism and the global embrace of alternative medicine—to more general concerns, including an end to violence, crime and war, a healthier environment, and international co-operation. Other New Agers adopt a fully utopian vision, believing that the world will be wholly transformed into an \"Age of Light\", with humans evolving into totally spiritual beings and experiencing unlimited love, bliss, and happiness. Rather than conceiving of the Age of Aquarius as an indefinite period, many believe that it would last for around two thousand years before being replaced by a further age. \n\nThere are various beliefs within the milieu as to how this new age will come about, but most emphasise the idea that it will be established through human agency ; others assert that it will be established with the aid of non-human forces such as spirits or extraterrestrials. Ferguson, for instance, said that there was a vanguard of humans known as the \"Aquarian conspiracy\" who were helping to bring the Age of Aquarius forth through their actions. Participants in the New Age typically express the view that their own spiritual actions are helping to bring about the Age of Aquarius, with writers like Ferguson and Argüelles presenting themselves as prophets ushering forth this future era. \n\nAnother recurring element of New Age is an emphasis on healing and alternative medicine . The general New Age ethos is that health is the natural state for the human being and that illness is a disruption of that natural balance. Hence, New Age therapies seek to heal \" illness \" as a general concept that includes physical, mental, and spiritual aspects; in doing so it critiques mainstream Western medicine for simply attempting to cure disease , and thus has an affinity with most forms of traditional medicine . Its focus of self-spirituality has led to the emphasis of self-healing, although also present are ideas on healing both others and the Earth itself. \n\nThe healing elements of the movement are difficult to classify given that a variety of terms are used, with some New Age authors using different terms to refer to the same trends, while others use the same term to refer to different things. However, Hanegraaff developed a set of categories into which the forms of New Age healing could be roughly categorised. The first of these was the Human Potential Movement , which argues that contemporary Western society suppresses much human potential, and accordingly professes to offer a path through which individuals can access those parts of themselves that they have alienated and suppressed, thus enabling them to reach their full potential and live a meaningful life. Hanegraaff described transpersonal psychology as the \"theoretical wing\" of this Human Potential Movement; in contrast to other schools of psychological thought, transpersonal psychology takes religious and mystical experiences seriously by exploring the uses of altered states of consciousness . Closely connected to this is the shamanic consciousness current, which argues that the shaman was a specialist in altered states of consciousness and seeks to adopt and imitate traditional shamanic techniques as a form of personal healing and growth. \n\nHanegraaff identified the second main healing current in the New Age movement as being holistic health . This emerged in the 1970s out of the free clinic movement of the 1960s, and has various connections with the Human Potential Movement. It emphasises the idea that the human individual is a holistic, interdependent relationship between mind, body, and spirit, and that healing is a process in which an individual becomes whole by integrating with the powers of the universe. A very wide array of methods are utilised within the holistic health movement, with some of the most common including acupuncture , reiki, biofeedback , chiropractic , yoga , applied kinesiology , homeopathy , aromatherapy , iridology , massage and other forms of bodywork , meditation and visualisation , nutritional therapy, psychic healing , herbal medicine , healing using crystals , metals, music, chromotherapy , and reincarnation therapy. Although the use of crystal healing has become a visual trope within the New Age, this practice was not common in esotericism prior to their adoption in the New Age milieu. The mainstreaming of the Holistic Health movement in the UK is discussed by Maria Tighe. The inter-relation of holistic health with the New Age movement is illustrated in Jenny Butler's ethnographic description of \"Angel therapy\" in Ireland. \n\nThe New Age is essentially about the search for spiritual and philosophical perspectives that will help transform humanity and the world. New Agers are willing to absorb wisdom teachings wherever they can find them, whether from an Indian guru, a renegade Christian priest, an itinerant Buddhist monk, an experiential psychotherapist or a Native American shaman. They are eager to explore their own inner potential with a view to becoming part of a broader process of social transformation. Their journey is towards totality of being. \n\nAccording to Drury, the New Age attempts to create \"a worldview that includes both science and spirituality\", while Hess noted how New Agers have \"a penchant for bringing together the technical and the spiritual, the scientific and the religious\". Although New Agers typically reject rationalism , the scientific method , and the academic establishment, they employ terminology and concepts borrowed from science and particularly from new physics . Moreover, a number of influences on New Age, such as David Bohm and Ilya Prigogine , had backgrounds as professional scientists. Hanegraaff identified \"New Age science\" as a form of Naturphilosophie . \n\nIn this, the milieu is interested in developing unified world views to discover the nature of the divine and establish a scientific basis for religious belief. Figures in the New Age movement—most notably Fritjof Capra in his The Tao of Physics (1975) and Gary Zukav in The Dancing Wu Li Masters (1979)—have drawn parallels between theories in the New Physics and traditional forms of mysticism , thus arguing that ancient religious ideas are now being proven by contemporary science. Many New Agers have adopted James Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis that the Earth acts akin to a single living organism, going further to propound that the Earth has a consciousness and intelligence. \n\nDespite New Agers' appeals to science, most of the academic and scientific establishments dismiss \"New Age science\" as pseudo-science , or at best existing in part on the fringes of genuine scientific research. This is an attitude also shared by many active in the field of parapsychology . In turn, New Agers often accuse the scientific establishment of pursuing a dogmatic and outmoded approach to scientific enquiry, believing that their own understandings of the universe will replace those of the academic establishment in a paradigm shift . \n\nThere is no ethical cohesion within the New Age phenomenon, although Hanegraaff argued that the central ethical tenet of the New Age is to cultivate one's own divine potential. Given that the movement's holistic interpretation of the universe prohibits a belief in a dualistic good and evil , negative events that happen are interpreted not as the result of evil but as lessons designed to teach an individual and enable them to advance spiritually. It rejects the Christian emphasis on sin and guilt , believing that these generate fear and thus negativity, which then hinder spiritual evolution . It also typically criticises the blaming and judging of others for their actions, believing that if an individual adopts these negative attitudes it harms their own spiritual evolution. Instead, the movement emphasizes positive thinking, although beliefs regarding the power behind such thoughts vary within New Age literature. Common New Age examples of how to generate such positive thinking include the repeated recitation of mantras and statements carrying positive messages, and the visualisation of a white light. \n\nAccording to Hanegraaff, the question of death and afterlife is not a \"pressing problem requiring an answer\" in the New Age. A belief in reincarnation is very common, where it is often viewed as being part of an individual's progressive spiritual evolution toward realisation of their own divinity. In New Age literature, the reality of reincarnation is usually treated as self-evident, with no explanation as to why practitioners embrace this afterlife belief over others, although New Agers endorse it in the belief that it ensures cosmic justice. Many New Agers believe in karma , treating it as a law of cause and effect that assures cosmic balance, although in some cases they stress that it is not a system that enforces punishment for past actions. Much New Age literature on reincarnation says that part of the human soul, that which carries the personality, perishes with the death of the body, while the Higher Self—that which connects with divinity—survives in order to be reborn into another body. It is believed that the Higher Self chooses the body and circumstances into which it will be born, in order to use it as a vessel through which to learn new lessons and thus advance its own spiritual evolution. New Age writers like Shakti Gawain and Louise Hay therefore express the view that humans are responsible for the events that happen to them during their life, an idea that many New Agers regard as empowering. At times, past life regression are employed within the New Age in order to reveal a Higher Soul's previous incarnations, usually with an explicit healing purpose. Some practitioners espouse the idea of a \"soul group\" or \"soul family\", a group of connected souls who reincarnate together as family of friendship units. Rather than reincarnation, another afterlife belief found among New Agers holds that an individual's soul returns to a \"universal energy\" on bodily death. \n\nBy the early twenty-first century... [the New Age phenomenon] has an almost entirely white, middle-class demography largely made up of professional, managerial, arts, and entrepreneurial occupations.\n\nIn the mid-1990s, the New Age was found primarily in the United States and Canada, Western Europe, and Australia and New Zealand. The fact that most individuals engaging in New Age activity do not describe themselves as \"New Agers\" renders it difficult to determine the total number of practitioners. Heelas highlighted the range of attempts to establish the number of New Age participants in the U.S. during this period, noting that estimates ranged from 20,000 to 6 million; he believed that the higher ranges of these estimates were greatly inflated by, for instance, an erroneous assumption that all Americans who believed in reincarnation were part of the New Age. He nevertheless suggested that over 10 million people in the U.S. had had some contact with New Age practices or ideas. Between 2000 and 2002, Heelas and Woodhead conducted research into the New Age in the English town of Kendal , Cumbria ; they found 600 people actively attended New Age activities on a weekly basis, representing 1.6% of the town's population. From this, they extrapolated that around 900,000 Britons regularly took part in New Age activities. In 2006, Heelas stated that New Age practices had grown to such an extent that they were \"increasingly rivaling the sway of Christianity in Western settings\". \n\nSociological investigation indicates that certain sectors of society are more likely to engage in New Age practices than others. In the United States, the first people to embrace the New Age belonged to the baby boomer generation, those born between 1946 and 1964. \n\nSutcliffe noted that although most influential New Age figureheads were male, approximately two-thirds of its participants were female. Heelas and Woodhead's Kendal Project found that of those regularly attending New Age activities in the town, 80% were female, while 78% of those running such activities were female. They attributed this female dominance to \"deeply entrenched cultural values and divisions of labour\" in Western society, according to which women were accorded greater responsibility for the well-being of others, thus making New Age practices more attractive to them. They suggested that men were less attracted to New Age activities because they were hampered by a \"masculinist ideal of autonomy and self-sufficiency\" which discouraged them from seeking the assistance of others for their inner development. \n\nThe majority of New Agers are from the middle and upper-middle classes of Western society. Heelas and Woodhead found that of the active Kendal New Agers, 57% had a university or college degree. Their Kendal Project also determined that 73% of active New Agers were aged over 45, and 55% were aged between 40 and 59; it also determined that many got involved while middle-aged. Comparatively few were either young or elderly. Heelas and Woodhead suggested that the dominance of middle-aged people, particularly women, was because at this stage of life they had greater time to devote to their own inner development, with their time previously having been dominated by raising children. They also suggested that middle-aged people were experiencing more age-related ailments than the young, and thus more keen to pursue New Age activities to improve their health. \n\nHeelas added that within the baby boomers, the movement had nevertheless attracted a diverse clientele. He typified the typical New Ager as someone who was well-educated yet disenchanted with mainstream society, thus arguing that the movement catered to those who believe that modernity is in crisis. He suggested that the movement appealed to many former practitioners of the 1960s counter-culture because while they came to feel that they were unable to change society, they were nonetheless interested in changing the self. He believed that many individuals had been \"culturally primed for what the New Age has to offer\", with the New Age attracting \"expressive\" people who were already comfortable with the ideals and outlooks of the movement's self-spirituality focus. It could be particularly appealing because the New Age suited the needs of the individual, whereas traditional religious options that are available primarily catered for the needs of a community. He believed that although the adoption of New Age beliefs and practices by some fitted the model of religious conversion , others who adopted some of its practices could not easily be considered to have converted to the religion. Sutcliffe described the \"typical\" participant in the New Age milieu as being \"a religious individualist, mixing and matching cultural resources in an animated spiritual quest\". \n\nThe degree to which individuals are involved in the New Age varies. Heelas argued that those involved could be divided into three broad groups; the first comprised those who were completely dedicated to it and its ideals, often working in professions that furthered those goals. The second consisted of \"serious part-timers\" who worked in unrelated fields but who nevertheless spent much of their free time involved in movement activities. The third was that of \"casual part-timers\" who occasionally involved themselves in New Age activities but for whom the movement was not a central aspect of their life. MacKian instead suggested that involvement could be seen as being layered like an onion; at the core are \"consultative\" practitioners who devote their life to New Age practices, around that are \"serious\" practitioners who still invest considerable effort into New Age activities, and on the periphery are \"non-practitioner consumers\", individuals affected by the general dissemination of New Age ideas but who do not devote themselves more fully to them. Many New Age practices have filtered into wider Western society, with a 2000 poll, for instance, revealing that 39% of the UK population had tried alternative therapies. \n\nIn 1995, Kyle stated that on the whole, New Agers in the United States preferred the values of the Democratic Party over those of the Republican Party . He added that most New Agers \"soundly rejected\" the agenda of former Republican President Ronald Reagan . \n\nMacKian suggested that this phenomenon was \"an inherently social mode of spirituality\", one which cultivated a sense of belonging among its participants and encouraged relations both with other humans and with non-human, otherworldly spirit entities. MacKian suggested that these communities \"may look very different\" from those of traditional religious groups. \n\nOnline connections were one of the ways that interested individuals met new contacts and established networks. \n\nSome New Agers advocate living in a simple and sustainable manner to reduce humanity's impact on the natural resources of Earth; and they shun consumerism . The New Age movement has been centered around rebuilding a sense of community to counter social disintegration ; this has been attempted through the formation of intentional communities , where individuals come together to live and work in a communal lifestyle. New Age centres have been set up in various parts of the world, representing an institutionalised form of the movement. Notable examples include the Naropa Institute in Boulder, Colorado , Holly Hock Farm near to Vancouver , the Wrekin Trust in West Malvern , Worcestershire , and the Skyros Centre in Skyros . Criticising mainstream Western education as counterproductive to the ethos of the movement, many New Age groups have established their own schools for the education of children, although in other cases such groups have sought to introduce New Age spiritual techniques into pre-existing establishments. \n\nBruce argued that in seeking to \"denying the validity of externally imposed controls and privileging the divine within\", the New Age sought to dismantle pre-existing social order, but that it failed to present anything adequate in its place. Heelas, however, cautioned that Bruce had arrived at this conclusion based on \"flimsy evidence\", and Aldred argued that only a minority of New Agers participate in community-focused activities; instead, she argued, the majority of New Agers participate mainly through the purchase of books and products targeted at the New Age market, positioning New Age as a primarily consumerist and commercial movement. \n\nNew Age spirituality has led to a wide array of literature on the subject and an active niche market, with books, music, crafts, and services in alternative medicine available at New Age stores, fairs , and festivals . [ citation needed ] New Age fairs—sometimes known as \"Mind, Body, Spirit fairs\", \"psychic fairs\", or \"alternative health fairs\"—are spaces in which a variety of goods and services are displayed by different vendors, including forms of alternative medicine and esoteric practices such as palmistry or tarot card reading. An example is the Mind Body Spirit Festival , held annually in the United Kingdom, at which—the religious studies scholar Christopher Partridge noted—one could encounter \"a wide range of beliefs and practices from crystal healing to ... Kirlian photography to psychic art, from angels to past-life therapy, from Theosophy to UFO religion, and from New Age music to the vegetarianism of Suma Chign Hai.\" Similar festivals are held across Europe and in Australia and the United States. \n\nA number of New Age proponents have emphasised the use of spiritual techniques as a tool for attaining financial prosperity, thus moving the movement away from its counter-cultural origins. Commenting on this \"New Age capitalism\", Hess observed that it was largely small-scale and entrepreneurial, focused around small companies run by members of the petite bourgeoisie , rather than being dominated by large scale multinational corporations. The links between New Age and commercial products have resulted in the accusation that New Age itself is little more than a manifestation of consumerism . This idea is generally rejected by New Age participants, who often reject any link between their practices and consumerist activities. \n\nEmbracing this attitude, various books have been published espousing such an ethos, established New Age centres have held spiritual retreats and classes aimed specifically at business people, and New Age groups have developed specialised training for businesses. During the 1980s, many U.S. corporations—among them IBM , AT&T , and General Motors —embraced New Age seminars, hoping that they could increase productivity and efficiency among their workforce, although in several cases this resulted in employees bringing legal action against their employers, saying that such seminars had infringed on their religious beliefs or damaged their psychological health. However, the use of spiritual techniques as a method for attaining profit has been an issue of major dispute within the wider New Age movement, with New Agers such as Spangler and Matthew Fox criticising what they see as trends within the community that are narcissistic and lack a social conscience. In particular, the movement's commercial elements have caused problems given that they often conflict with its general economically egalitarian ethos; as York highlighted, \"a tension exists in New Age between socialistic egalitarianism and capitalistic private enterprise\". \n\nGiven that it encourages individuals to choose spiritual practices on the grounds of personal preference and thus encourages them to behave as a consumer, the New Age has been considered to be well suited to modern society. \n\nThe term \" new-age music \" is applied, sometimes negatively, to forms of ambient music , a genre that developed in the 1960s and was popularised in the 1970s, particularly with the work of Brian Eno . The genre's relaxing nature resulted in it becoming popular within New Age circles, with some forms of the genre having a specifically New Age orientation. Studies have determined that new-age music can be an effective component of stress management . \n\nThe style began in the late 1960s and early 1970s with the works of free-form jazz groups recording on the ECM label; such as Oregon , the Paul Winter Consort , and other pre-ambient bands; as well as ambient music performer Brian Eno, classical avant-garde musician Daniel Kobialka , and the psychoacoustic environments recordings of Irv Teibel . In the early 1970s, it was mostly instrumental with both acoustic and electronic styles. New-age music evolved to include a wide range of styles from electronic space music using synthesizers and acoustic instrumentals using Native American flutes and drums , singing bowls , Australian didgeridoos and world music sounds to spiritual chanting from other cultures. \n\nWhile many commentators have focused on the spiritual and cultural aspects of the New Age movement, it also has a political component. The New Age political movement became visible in the 1970s, peaked in the 1980s, and continued into the 1990s. The sociologist of religion Steven Bruce noted that the New Age provides ideas on how to deal with \"our socio-psychological problems\". Scholar of religion James R. Lewis observed that, despite the common caricature of New Agers as narcissistic, \"significant numbers\" of them were \"trying to make the planet a better place on which to live,\" and scholar J. Gordon Melton's New Age Encyclopedia (1990) included an entry called \"New Age politics\". Some New Agers have entered the political system in an attempt to advocate for the societal transformation that the New Age promotes. \n\nAlthough New Age activists have been motivated by New Age concepts like holism, interconnectedness, monism, and environmentalism , their political ideas are diverse, ranging from far-right and conservative through to liberal , socialist , and libertarian . Accordingly, Kyle stated that \"New Age politics is difficult to describe and categorize. The standard political labels—left or right, liberal or conservative—miss the mark.\" MacKian suggested that the New Age operated as a form of \"world-realigning infrapolitics\" that undermines the disenchantment of modern Western society. \n\nThe extent to which New Age spokespeople mix religion and politics varies. New Agers are often critical of the established political order, regarding it as \"fragmented, unjust, hierarchical, patriarchal, and obsolete\". The New Ager Mark Satin for instance spoke of \"New Age politics\" as a politically radical \"third force\" that was \"neither left nor right\". He believed that in contrast to the conventional political focus on the \"institutional and economic symptoms\" of society's problems, his \"New Age politics\" would focus on \"psychocultural roots\" of these issues. Ferguson regarded New Age politics as \"a kind of Radical Centre\", one that was \"not neutral, not middle-of-the-road, but a view of the whole road.\" Fritjof Capra argued that Western societies have become sclerotic because of their adherence to an outdated and mechanistic view of reality, which he calls the Newtonian/Cartesian paradigm . In Capra's view, the West needs to develop an organic and ecological \"systems view\" of reality in order to successfully address its social and political issues. Corinne McLaughlin argued that politics need not connote endless power struggles, that a new \"spiritual politics\" could attempt to synthesize opposing views on issues into higher levels of understanding. \n\nMany New Agers advocate globalisation and localisation , but reject nationalism and the role of the nation-state . Some New Age spokespeople have called for greater decentralisation and global unity, but are vague about how this might be achieved; others call for a global, centralised government. Satin for example argued for a move away from the nation-state and towards self-governing regions that, through improved global communication networks, would help engender world unity. Benjamin Creme conversely argued that \"the Christ\", a great Avatar , Maitreya, the World Teacher , expected by all the major religions as their \"Awaited One\", would return to the world and establish a strong, centralised global government in the form of the United Nations ; this would be politically re-organised along a spiritual hierarchy. Kyle observed that New Agers often speak favourably of democracy and citizens' involvement in policy making but are critical of representative democracy and majority rule , thus displaying elitist ideas to their thinking. \n\nScholars have noted several New Age political groups. Self-Determination: A Personal/Political Network, lauded by Ferguson and Satin, was described at length by sociology of religion scholar Steven Tipton. Founded in 1975 by California state legislator John Vasconcellos and others, it encouraged Californians to engage in personal growth work and political activities at the same time, especially at the grassroots level. Hanegraaff noted another California-based group, the Institute of Noetic Sciences , headed by the author Willis Harman . It advocated a change in consciousness—in \"basic underlying assumptions\"—in order to come to grips with global crises. Kyle said that the New York City–based Planetary Citizens organization, headed by United Nations consultant and Earth at Omega author Donald Keys, sought to implement New Age political ideas. \n\nScholar J. Gordon Melton and colleagues focused on the New World Alliance, a Washington, DC–based organization founded in 1979 by Mark Satin and others. According to Melton et al., the Alliance tried to combine left- and right-wing ideas as well as personal growth work and political activities. Group decision-making was facilitated by short periods of silence. Sponsors of the Alliance's national political newsletter included Willis Harman and John Vasconcellos. Scholar James R. Lewis counted \"Green politics\" as one of the New Age's more visible activities. One academic book says that the U.S. Green Party movement began as an initiative of a handful of activists including Charlene Spretnak , co-author of a \"'new age' interpretation\" of the German Green movement (Capra and Spretnak's Green Politics ), and Mark Satin, author of New Age Politics . Another academic publication says Spretnak and Satin largely co-drafted the U.S. Greens' founding document, the \"Ten Key Values\" statement. \n\nWhile the term New Age may have fallen out of favor, scholar George Chryssides notes that the New Age by whatever name is \"still alive and active\" in the 21st century. In the realm of politics, New Ager Mark Satin's book Radical Middle (2004) reached out to mainstream liberals. York (2005) identified \"key New Age spokespeople\" including William Bloom, Satish Kumar , and Starhawk who were emphasizing a link between spirituality and environmental consciousness. Former Esalen Institute staffer Stephen Dinan's Sacred America, Sacred World (2016) prompted a long interview of Dinan in Psychology Today , which called the book a \"manifesto for our country's evolution that is both political and deeply spiritual\". \n\nIn 2013 longtime New Age author Marianne Williamson launched a campaign for a seat in the United States House of Representatives , telling The New York Times that her type of spirituality was what American politics needed. \"America has swerved from its ethical center\", she said. Running as an independent in west Los Angeles, she finished fourth in her district's open primary election with 13% of the vote. In early 2019, Williamson announced her candidacy for the Democratic Party nomination for president of the United States in the 2020 United States presidential election . A 5,300-word article about her presidential campaign in The Washington Post said she had \"plans to fix America with love. Tough love\". In January 2020 she withdrew her bid for the nomination. \n\nMainstream periodicals tended to be less than sympathetic; sociologist Paul Ray and psychologist Sherry Anderson discussed in their 2000 book The Cultural Creatives , what they called the media's \"zest for attacking\" New Age ideas, and offered the example of a 1996 Lance Morrow essay in Time magazine. Nearly a decade earlier, Time had run a long cover story critical of New Age culture; the cover featured a headshot of a famous actress beside the headline, \" Om.... THE NEW AGE starring Shirley MacLaine, faith healers, channelers, space travelers, and crystals galore\". The story itself, by former Saturday Evening Post editor Otto Friedrich , was sub-titled, \"A Strange Mix of Spirituality and Superstition Is Sweeping Across the Country\". In 1988, the magazine The New Republic ran a four-page critique of New Age culture and politics by a journalist Richard Blow entitled simply, \"Moronic Convergence\". \n\nSome New Agers and New Age sympathizers responded to such criticisms. For example, sympathizers Ray and Anderson said that much of it was an attempt to \"stereotype\" the movement for idealistic and spiritual change, and to cut back on its popularity. New Age theoretician David Spangler tried to distance himself from what he called the \"New Age glamour\" of crystals, talk-show channelers, and other easily commercialized phenomena, and sought to underscore his commitment to the New Age as a vision of genuine social transformation. \n\nInitially, academic interest in the New Age was minimal. The earliest academic studies of the New Age phenomenon were performed by specialists in the study of new religious movements such as Robert Ellwood . This research was often scanty because many scholars regarded the New Age as an insignificant cultural fad. Having been influenced by the U.S. anti-cult movement , much of it was also largely negative and critical of New Age groups. The \"first truly scholarly study\" of the phenomenon was an edited volume put together by James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton in 1992. From that point on, the number of published academic studies steadily increased. \n\nIn 1994, Christoph Bochinger published his study of the New Age in Germany, \"New Age\" und moderne Religion . This was followed by Michael York's sociological study in 1995 and Richard Kyle's U.S.-focused work in 1995. In 1996, Paul Heelas published a sociological study of the movement in Britain, being the first to discuss its relationship with business. That same year, Wouter Hanegraaff published New Age Religion and Western Culture , a historical analysis of New Age texts; Hammer later described it as having \"a well-deserved reputation as the standard reference work on the New Age\". Most of these early studies were based on a textual analysis of New Age publications, rather than on an ethnographic analysis of its practitioners. \n\nSutcliffe and Gilhus argued that 'New Age studies' could be seen as having experienced two waves; in the first, scholars focused on \"macro-level analyses of the content and boundaries\" of the \"movement\", while the second wave featured \"more variegated and contextualized studies of particular beliefs and practices\". Sutcliffe and Gilhus have also expressed concern that, as of 2013, 'New Age studies' has yet to formulate a set of research questions scholars can pursue. The New Age has proved a challenge for scholars of religion operating under more formative models of what \"religion\" is. By 2006, Heelas noted that the New Age was so vast and diverse that no scholar of the subject could hope to keep up with all of it. \n\nMainstream Christianity has typically rejected the ideas of the New Age; Christian critiques often emphasise that the New Age places the human individual before God. Most published criticism of the New Age has been produced by Christians, particularly those on the religion's fundamentalist wing . In the United States, the New Age became a major concern of evangelical Christian groups in the 1980s, an attitude that influenced British evangelical groups. During that decade, evangelical writers such as Constance Cumbey , Dave Hunt , Gary North , and Douglas Groothuis published books criticising the New Age; a number propagated conspiracy theories regarding its origin and purpose. The most successful such publication was Frank E. Peretti 's 1986 novel This Present Darkness , which sold over a million copies; it depicted the New Age as being in league with feminism and secular education as part of a conspiracy to overthrow Christianity. Modern Christian critics of the New Age include Doreen Virtue , a former New Age writer from California who converted to fundamentalist Christianity in 2017. \n\nOfficial responses to the New Age have been produced by major Christian organisations like the Roman Catholic Church , the Church of England , and the Methodist Church . The Roman Catholic Church published A Christian reflection on the New Age in 2003, following a six-year study; the 90-page document criticizes New Age practices such as yoga, meditation, feng shui , and crystal healing. According to the Vatican, euphoric states attained through New Age practices should not be confused with prayer or viewed as signs of God's presence. Cardinal Paul Poupard , then-president of the Pontifical Council for Culture , said the New Age is \"a misleading answer to the oldest hopes of man\". Monsignor Michael Fitzgerald , then-president of the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue , stated at the Vatican conference on the document: the \"Church avoids any concept that is close to those of the New Age\". On the contrary, some fringe Christian groups have adopted a more positive view of the New Age, among them the Christaquarians, and Christians Awakening to a New Awareness, all of which believe that New Age ideas can enhance a person's Christian faith. \n\nNeopagan practices highlight the centrality of the relationship between humans and nature and reinvent religions of the past, while New Agers are more interested in transforming individual consciousness and shaping the future.\n\nThere is academic debate about the connection between the New Age and Modern Paganism , sometimes termed \"Neo-paganism\". The two phenomena have often been confused and conflated, particularly in Christian critiques. Religious studies scholar Sarah Pike asserted that there was a \"significant overlap\" between the two religious movements, while Aidan A. Kelly stated that Paganism \"parallels the New Age movement in some ways, differs sharply from it in others, and overlaps it in some minor ways\". Other scholars have identified them as distinct phenomena that share overlap and commonalities. Hanegraaff suggested that whereas various forms of contemporary Paganism were not part of the New Age movement—particularly those that pre-dated the movement—other Pagan religions and practices could be identified as New Age. Partridge portrayed both Paganism and the New Age as different streams of occulture ( occult culture) that merge at points. \n\nVarious differences between the two movements have been highlighted; the New Age movement focuses on an improved future, whereas the focus of Paganism is on the pre-Christian past. Similarly, the New Age movement typically propounds a universalist message that sees all religions as fundamentally the same, whereas Paganism stresses the difference between monotheistic religions and those embracing a polytheistic or animistic theology. While the New Age emphasises a light-centred image, Paganism acknowledges both light and dark, life and death, and recognises the savage side of the natural world. Many Pagans have sought to distance themselves from the New Age movement, even using \"New Age\" as an insult within their community, while conversely many involved in the New Age have expressed criticism of Paganism for emphasizing the material world over the spiritual. Many Pagans have expressed criticism of the high fees charged by New Age teachers, something not typically present in the Pagan movement. \n\nNew Age often adopts spiritual ideas and practices from other, particularly non-Western cultures. According to York, these may include \"Hawaiian Kahuna magic, Australian Aboriginal dream-working , South American Amerindian ayahuasca and San Pedro ceremonies, Hindu Ayurveda and yoga, Chinese Feng Shui, Qi Gong , and Tai Chi .\" \n\nThe New Age has been accused of cultural imperialism , misappropriating sacred ceremonies, and exploitation of the intellectual and cultural property of Indigenous peoples. Indigenous American spiritual leaders, such as Elders councils of the Lakota , Cheyenne , Navajo , Creek , Hopi , Chippewa , and Haudenosaunee have denounced New Age misappropriation of their sacred ceremonies and other intellectual property , stating that \"[t]he value of these instructions and ceremonies [when led by unauthorized people] are questionable, maybe meaningless, and hurtful to the individual carrying false messages\". Traditional leaders of the Lakota, Dakota , and Nakota peoples have reached consensus to reject \"the expropriation of [their] ceremonial ways by non-Indians\". They see the New Age movement as either not fully understanding, deliberately trivializing, or distorting their way of life, and strongly disapprove of all such \" plastic medicine people \" who are appropriating their spiritual ways. \n\nIndigenous leaders have spoken out against individuals from within their own communities who may go out into the world to become a \"white man's shaman\", and any \"who are prostituting our spiritual ways for their own selfish gain, with no regard for the spiritual well-being of the people as a whole\". The terms \" plastic shaman \" and \"plastic medicine person\" have been used to describe an outsider who identifies or promotes themselves as a shaman, holy person, or other traditional spiritual leader, yet has no genuine connection to the traditions or cultures represented. \n\nNew Age politics might be seen not as a wayward, pathological creature of the New Left's imagination, but as a political innocent in candid, questioning dialogue with the unclaimed mainstream territory of progressive, rather than atomistic, individualism. Indeed, if we were to examine some of the social and political threads that run through the aery fabric of New Age thinking, we would find certain themes that resonate with the necessary conditions for a left version of progressive individualism. Generally speaking, New Age addresses its adherents as active participants, with a measure of control over their everyday lives. ... The New Age \"person\" is also in many respects an individual whose personal growth is indissociable from the environment; a link fleshed out in a variety of ecotopian stories and romances. So, too, the small-scale imperative of New Age's cooperative communitarianism brings with it a host of potentially critical positions. ...\n\nToward the end of the 20th century, some social and political analysts and activists were arguing that the New Age political perspective had something to offer mainstream society. In 1987, some political scientists launched the \"Section on Ecological and Transformational Politics\" of the American Political Science Association , and an academic book prepared by three of them stated that the \"transformational politics\" concept was meant to subsume such terms as new age and new paradigm . In 1991, scholar of cultural studies Andrew Ross suggested that New Age political ideas—however muddled and naïve—could help progressives construct an appealing alternative to both atomistic individualism and self-denying collectivism. In 2005, British researcher Stuart Rose urged scholars of alternative religions to pay more attention to the New Age's interest in such topics as \"new socio-political thinking\" and \"New Economics\", topics Rose discussed in his book Transforming the World: Bringing the New Age Into Focus , issued by a European academic publisher. \n\nOther political thinkers and activists saw New Age politics less positively. On the political right, author George Weigel argued that New Age politics was just a retooled and pastel-colored version of leftism. Conservative evangelical writer Douglas Groothuis, discussed by scholars Hexham and Kemp, warned that New Age politics could lead to an oppressive world government. On the left, scholars argued that New Age politics was an oxymoron: that personal growth has little or nothing to do with political change. One political scientist said New Age politics fails to recognize the reality of economic and political power. Another academic, Dana L. Cloud , wrote a lengthy critique of New Age politics as a political ideology; she faulted it for not being opposed to the capitalist system , or to liberal individualism. \n\nA criticism of New Age often made by leftists is that its focus on individualism deflects participants from engaging in socio-political activism. This perspective regards New Age as a manifestation of consumerism that promotes elitism and indulgence by allowing wealthier people to affirm their socio-economic status through consuming New Age products and therapies. New Agers who do engage in socio-political activism have also been criticized. Journalist Harvey Wasserman suggested that New Age activists were too averse to social conflict to be effective politically. Melton et al. found that New Age activists' commitment to the often frustrating process of consensus decision-making led to \"extended meetings and minimal results\", and a pair of futurists concluded that one once-promising New Age activist group had been both \"too visionary and too vague\" to last. ",
  "Tapu is a Polynesian traditional concept denoting something holy or sacred, with \" spiritual restriction\" or \"implied prohibition\"; it involves rules and prohibitions. The English word taboo derives from this later meaning and dates from Captain James Cook 's visit to Tonga in 1777.\n\nThe concept exists in many Polynesian societies, including traditional Māori , Samoan , Kiribati , Rapanui , Tahitian , Hawaiian , and Tongan cultures, in most cases using a recognisably similar word (from Proto-Polynesian *tapu ), though the Rotuman term for this concept is \"ha'a\". In Hawaii, a similar concept is known as kapu - /t/ and /k/ are standard allophonic variations in Hawaiian phonology .\n\nThe root also exists outside Polynesian languages, in the broader Austronesian family : e.g. Fijian tabu , Hiw (Vanuatu) toq [tɔkʷ] ‘holy, sacred’, Mwotlap ne-teq [nɛ-tɛk​͡pʷ] ‘cemetery’… \n\nWhether Polynesian or not, all modern forms go back to a Proto-Oceanic etymon reconstructed as * tabu [taᵐbu] , and whose meaning was “forbidden, off limits; sacred, due to a sentiment of awe before spiritual forces”. \n\nAs for cognates outside Oceanic, they seem to be confined to the Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian group, with a form reconstructable as * tambu . \n\nIn Māori and Tongan traditions, something that is tapu is considered inviolable or sacrosanct. Things or places which are tapu must be left alone, and may not be approached or interfered with. In some cases, they should not even be spoken of.\n\nIn Māori society the concept was often used by tohunga ( priests ) to protect resources from over-exploitation , by declaring a fishery or other resource as tapu (see rāhui ).\n\nThere are two kinds of tapu, the private (relating to individuals) and the public tapu (relating to communities). A person, object, or place that is tapu, may not be touched by human contact, in some cases, not even approached. A person, object, or place could be made sacred by tapu for a certain time.\n\nBefore European contact, tapu was one of the strongest forces in Māori life. A violation of tapu could have dire consequences, including the death of the offender through sickness or at the hands of someone affected by the offence. In earlier times food cooked for a person of high rank was tapu, and could not be eaten by an inferior. A chief's house was tapu, and even the chief could not eat food in the interior of his house. Not only were the houses of people of high rank perceived to be tapu, but also their possessions including their clothing. Burial grounds and places of death were always tapu, and these areas were often surrounded by a protective fence.\n\nIn at least one case, a chief declared a whole settlement - Auckland , a newly founded European settler town - as tapu, to clarify to other tribes that he considered it as under his protection. \n\nToday, tapu is still observed in matters relating to sickness, death, and burial:\n\nTapu is also still observed at the site of whale strandings . Whales are regarded as spiritual treasures as being descendants of the ocean god, Tangaroa , and are as such held in very high respect. Sites of whale strandings and any whale carcasses from strandings are treated as sacred ground. \n\nNoa , on the other hand, lifts the tapu from the person or the object. Noa is similar to a blessing. Tapu and noa remain part of Māori culture today, although persons today are not subject to the same tapu as that of previous times. A new house today, for example, may have a noa ceremony to remove the tapu , in order to make the home safe before the family moves in.",
  "Bottom line up front , or BLUF , is the practice of beginning a message with its key information (the \"bottom line\"). This provides the reader with the most important information first. By extension, that information is also called a BLUF. It differs from an abstract or executive summary in that it is simpler and more concise, similar to a thesis statement , and it resembles the inverted pyramid practice in journalism and the so-called “deductive” presentation of information, in which conclusions precede the material that justifies them, in contrast to “inductive” presentation, which lays out arguments before the conclusions drawn from them.\n\nBLUF is a standard in U.S. military communication whose aim is to make military messages precise and powerful. It differs from an older, more-traditional style in which conclusions and recommendations are included at the end, following the arguments and considerations of facts. The BLUF concept is not exclusive to writing since it can also be used in conversations and interviews. \n\nBLUF is used for effective communication. Studies show that organizations with effective communications produced a 47% greater return to shareholders over five years. BLUF aims to enable the receiver of a message to make faster decisions, especially for people who are busy, time-constrained, or overloaded with lots of information. BLUF helps manage a reader's load as most readers' priority is to get through all text or copy quickly and efficiently. This way, the reader can grasp the main idea or the whole thought of a write-up. [ citation needed ] The BLUF approach can help writers better organize their thoughts by starting with the big idea that they want to convey. For writers, announcing the BLUF convention while the article is in draft form might give the author a sense of clarity because the essay's purpose is stated early on, and having it written out can keep the writer on task. \n\nBLUF communications place the main point of a message at the beginning and then follow it up with the context. In addition, it is used to enforce speed and clarity in delivering reports and emails. It is followed by essential background information that summarizes or enumerates the considerations (events or prior decisions) that led to the bottom line.\n\nFor example:\n\nBLUF: I need you to approve both the design and content of the attached flyer by noon on August 10.\n\nThis flyer is for an upcoming conference at which we are exhibiting. I have included information about the upcoming classes we are offering, our contact information, and a list of the services we offer.\n\nBy putting the bottom line up front, the example above gives the receiver what is expected of them and the task's level of priority.\n\nThe phrase \"bottom line up front\" comes from a 100-page long document entitled \" Army Regulation 25–50: Information Management: Records Management: Preparing and Managing Correspondence \". One of the standards for army writing for correspondences includes the use of BLUF, as cited in the following text:\n\n\"Army writing will be concise, organized, and to the point. Two essential requirements include putting the main point at the beginning of the correspondence (bottom line up front) and using the active voice (for example, \"You are entitled to jump pay for the time you spent in training last year\").\" \n\nIn a 2017 guidance on how the U.S. Defense Department answers inquiries from Capitol Hill, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis expects the department to improve its communication with Congress \"at every level\". According to an August 22 memo from Capt. Hallock Mohler, Mattis' executive secretary, responses to congressional inquiries directed to the secretary or deputy secretary \"must be completed within five calendar days\". If more time is needed, \"an interim response or reply will be sent indicating when to expect a final one. Mattis' guidance includes the following two directions: \"Answer the question asked. Address the issue raised. Do not avoid the question or answer a different question. If you can't answer the question or address the issue, state why.\" And \"Give members of Congress the Bottom Line Up Front ; be direct and to the point using clear, concise, and straightforward language.\" \n\nThe various support units of the military also use the BLUF to convey their study and findings, as shown in the following abstract from a medical journal:\n\n\" Bottom Line Up Front : In this perspective essay, ENS Ofir Nevo and Dr Laura Lambert briefly discuss the concept of an outward mindset and how they have applied it in the context of medical education. ENS Nevo shares his story of deciding to attend medical school at the Uniformed Services University, as part of his desire and commitment to serve others. Early on, the requirements of medical school created intense demands that began to disconnect him from the commitment and connection that first drew him to a medical career. ENS Nevo describes how an awareness of the choice of mindset helped him address these challenges and stay better connected to his purpose and calling. A case analysis by Lambert further explores how the awareness and practice of an outward mindset may help students, residents, and attendings see how they can improve their own well-being and connection to the people that brought them to medicine in the first place. Their experiences demonstrate how outward mindset principles can be a valuable tool for empowering students and physicians with a perspective that invites new solutions for the challenges of life and work.\" \n\nSimilarly, military lawyers use BLUF to summarize the key points of their reports:\n\n\"Bottom line up front: no two states have identical national laws; even our understanding and application of the laws of International Humanitarian Law (IHL) (Geneva and Hague being the cornerstones) are not uniform. As judge advocates (JA) and legal advisors (LEGADs), we have a central role in identifying and understanding the relevant national positions within combined forces, the implications for the force, and advising how to minimize the operational or tactical impact, in order to ensure mission accomplishment.\" \n\nMilitary officers also use short BLUF to convey a positive review, such as \"Bottom line up front, you should read this book. That said, while I do recommend it, it is not without some serious issues.\" As well as a negative review, as follows:\n\n\"Here's the bottom line up front : As physicist Wolfgang Pauli famously quipped, \"This is not right. It isn't even wrong .\" Lt Col Robert Spalding's article \"America's Two Air Forces\" (Summer 2009) is deeply flawed in both premise and argument. Meaningful analysis of our aircraft requirements demands sound methodology and critical assessments that minimize internal biases. Unfortunately, the author falls far short on both counts. He describes a requirement for a bifurcated US Air Force equipped to meet the demands of peer-competitor threats and irregular warfare, and then asserts that current aircraft procurement plans will fail to meet either requirement. While there is some merit in his general assessment of roles and missions for his \"Two Air Forces\" (kudos to his discussion of irregular warfare), the analysis offered – which is inadequate and often specious – fails to support his conclusions. I will address his assertion that our Air Force should focus on a peer-competitor force structure.\" \n\nAmong its many rules, the now-rescinded DA pamphlet mandated structuring written staff products with the main point, or bottom line, at the beginning. The pamphlet said Army writers should give the bottom line up front, or BLUF, because \"the greatest weakness in ineffective writing is that it doesn't quickly transmit a focused message.\" This is applicable not only in the military letters but also in writing emails, conversations, digital media, and many more. \n\nWhen writing a document for business and academic purposes, BLUF helps in writing the message and argumentation because it features prominently a main \"what\" and \"so what\". Stating the key judgment and significance up front sets up the argument, ensures the message is clear, and highlights why the reader should care about the document. In order to create a reader-friendly prose, writers structure their paragraphs using BLUF format to better aid the reader's ability to recall the paragraph's main idea or content. BLUF-structured topic sentences are applicable when writing literature review, experimental results, and argumentative essays. \n\nThe BLUF style can also be routinely seen in executive summaries, reports, subject lines in e-mails, and abstracts in scholarly articles. The intention to place the bottom line at the onset is done because executives tend to focus on problem solving. It may be applied directly to the format of a résumé to prevent it being too long or wordy. In certain technical writing , BLUF may be considered desirable. It has also been advocated for scholarly articles. BLUF gives brevity in communication. This conciseness in communication comes from placing at the start the conclusion the summarized vital information and actions.\n\nIn journalistic writing, BLUF resembles the inverted pyramid structure for the latter also aims to serve the readers well by arranging the story elements in descending order of importance. Like the inverted pyramid structure in which the story's conclusion is already contained in its lead, writing in BLUF structure adheres to brevity and clarity so that readers can understand the message right away without sacrificing essential facts and without having to reread the message. \n\nArmy writing is effective when it is functional and satisfies the writer's and the intended readers' purposes effectively ( adequate to accomplish a purpose; producing the intended or expected result ). The BLUF model is designed to state upfront the purpose of the message and the required action to be taken. It is intended to respond quickly to the five Ws : who, what, where, when, and why. This kind of writing requires precision and direct statements that enforce fast and clear communications. Their subject lines use keywords in all caps to note the email's purpose, such as info (for informational purposes only), request (seeks permission or approval by the recipient), and action (the recipient must take some action.) The following example is an example of a BLUF message from the Air Force Handbook: \" BLUF : Effective 29 October 2013, all Air Force Doctrine Documents (AFDDs) have been rescinded and replaced by core doctrine volumes and doctrine annexes. \" Another example comes from the U.S. offensive in Iraq in 2007: \"The battle against al-Qa'eda in Diyala, Operation Arrowhead Ripper, is expected to last for weeks. The end state is to destroy the al-Qa'eda influences in this province and eliminate their threat against the people.\" \n\nAlong with the military professionals, analysts from the intelligence community also use the BLUF. Intelligence analysts often start an assessment with their bottom line up front. Their analytic reports are often drafted for busy policymakers possessing limited time for consumption of information and who therefore prefer the main points and judgements plainly presented at the beginning. For example, CIA Reports and Estimate 34-39's bottom-line-up-front judgment assessed Soviet intentions in Latin America, especially on what the Soviets would attempt:\n\n(1) winning support of Soviet positions by exploiting certain patterns in Latin American life that facilitate the Communist approach and by taking advantage of specific incidents for propaganda purposes; (2) reducing the extent of Western Hemisphere solidarity by exploiting historical antagonisms, opposed intensely nationalistic sentiments, and conflicting national interests; (3) causing dissention between political factions in some countries (particularly Bolivia, Ecuador, Chile, Cuba, and Guatemala) to the point of impairing political stability and of shifting the balance of power; (4) taking direct military action by harassing sea lines of communication between the US and Latin American through submarine action and by landing sabotage agents and small commando parties; and (5) and most important, reducing Latin American economic support of the US in several important fields. \n\nThis assessment suggests that potential Soviet actions in Latin America may increase and do so nefariously. These types of BLUF judgments were discussed often at the U.S. National Security Council meetings after WWII up to the early 1950s.\n\nAnother example would be the Muslim insurgency in Mindanao, with the following BLUF: \"Substantive resolution of a decades-long Muslim insurgency in Mindanao is unlikely anytime soon despite the signing of peace agreements between Manila and the separatist militants. Several entrenched obstacles to resolution suggest that the conflict will continue to drain the Philippines' scarce security resources, thus limiting its ability to pursue greater military cooperation with its security partners, and that parts of Mindanao will remain a haven for terrorists. Endemic poverty, corruption, powerful political opposition, factionalism, Manila's weakness in resources and capacity, and inflexibility on outcome hamper both sides.\"\n\nThe importance of BLUF in the intelligence community may be summarized as follows:\n\n\"These busy men and women rely on clear, concise, and accurate intelligence reporting to make daily decisions that affect U.S. national security, U.S. policies, and the lives of U.S. servicemen and -women. Arranging your intelligence reporting in the BLUF format helps them efficiently locate and comprehend the information they need.\" \n\nIn a Harvard Business Review article, Kabir Sehgal enumerated three main ways to format emails with military precision: (1) Subject with key words – Key words specify the nature in email (e.g. Action, Sign, Info, Decision, etc.); (2) Bottom Line Up Front (BLUF) – Emails should be short that basically answers the 5W's: who, what, when, where, and why; (3) Be Economical – short enough to understand and covey all the details. Using of Active voice is highly mandates rather than using passive voice.\" \n\nIt has been recommended that BLUF be used in writing policy papers and memos. This is because policymakers have short attention spans, given that they have much work to do. They may not appreciate lengthy prose and verbosity. They only want the essential information, so as not to get bogged down into details.\n\nIn writing policy papers and memos, military professionals, intelligence analysts, policy analysts, and the like need to include any second-order or third-order effect in their BLUF. The inclusion upfront of the result of the direct result of an action or change will entice the busy policymakers to read the whole memo or set it aside and read later. To illustrate, Title IX's college sports regulation makes sure women and men have the same rights. Women and men must be equal in both athletic scholarships, and the male-female ratio of athletes needs to match the school's student ratio. This is a first-order effect – more women get to play sports and receive scholarships. However, due to financial constraints, football is the only sport that makes money, and there is not a women's sport with an equivalent number of players. Hence, if the school wants to have a football team, they will also have to have five women's sports teams before adding another men's sport. A second-order effect is schools are (economically) forced to drop some of the less common men's sports teams. A third-order effect may be the sport loses popularity over time (wrestling is an example). [ unreliable source? ]\n\nApplying this to the policy world, the two examples show this BLUF structure with a second-order effect: (1) The Philippine President will probably sign key legislation for the peace accord, but opposition elements are likely to challenge the law in court and thwart implementation. (2) An Islamic militant group is publicizing the terrorist activities of its supporters in the region as part of a media campaign to promote the group's network there, which encourage foreign fighters to travel to the region.\n\nIn conversation, the BLUF model can be used to keep conversation or answers to questions concise and focused on the immediate topic, in order to help a person state the main point (such as in an interview). The BLUF approach helps top-level managers and senior military officials in decision-making especially under severe time constraints, when faced with numerous issues on a given timeframe, and when communication of essential information is necessary in dealing with high-pressure situations. \n\nBLUF is also useful when conversing at the organizational level. In the BLUF framework, for effective communication, it is necessary to identify the purpose of the communication and share that purpose with the audience (e.g. bosses, workers, and colleagues). In this framework, instead of reporting a detailed chronology of all the events that led up to this point, people first report the BLUF or conclusion, then explain the premises that led to the conclusion. \n\nAt present, 66% of consumers open their messages through mobile devices. Digital communication follow a different set of norms than direct mail, as emails require brevity and clarity of message content; hence, the BLUF framework is applicable to optimizing writing for mobile email consumption. An email patterned in BLUF declares the purpose of the email and action required. The subject of the email states exactly what the email is about. The body of the message should quickly answer the five Ws: who, what, where, when, and why. The first few sentences explains the purpose and reason of the email and continues to give supporting details. Message conveyed must be clear if simply for information or requiring action. This help email recipients grasp and retain the message. Thus, an effective BLUF distills the most important information for the reader (receiver of the message).\n\nThe nature of BLUF writing is short and concise; hence, it helps reduce time most especially in the decision-making process.\n\nBelow is an example of a traditional narrative email between colleagues who try to solve a problem:\n\nJim, Over the course of working on the new project, we've encountered some challenges working with the data. When we try to take table A from Database 1 and load it into Database 2, we are getting an error. So far, we've tried a few methods we found online here and here but nothing seems to work. Do you have any experience with this type of data transfer? If not do you know anyone else that has experience converting Oracle data to SQL Server?\n\nAs the example reflected, the sender's query came to an end. Further, no information on what kind of error and even gave several links to the receiver instead of elaborating the methods and put a technical detail after asking for help.\nIn contrast, the BLUF email version is:\n\nJim, Do you know who can help us convert Oracle data to SQL Server? This is for the new project and we've encountered some challenges...\n\nIn the second message, the receiver already knows if he can help or he needs the assistance of another colleague. This will lead to a faster decision-making process.\n\nThe Persimmon Group had revealed that nearly 30% of office workdays are dedicated to reading and answering email and workers spend about 40% of their time in meetings. This has been rising due to the continuous integration of technology in the business field as part of their processes. During the COVID-19 pandemic , the National Bureau of Economic Research found that the number of meetings per person increased by 13.5%. Employees spent about 11.5% less time in meetings during the post-lockdown period. \n\nBeyond textual discussions, BLUF in digital communication also means conveying data. This includes making a presentation filled with facts and figures. A presentation can begin with a \"BLUF slide\"—a compelling visual image that encapsulates the overall thesis. Before presenting research data to marketers, for instance, presenters may show a timeline of a company's sales before and after it experienced a public relations crisis. \n\nThe BLUF model can also be used in planning and management to ensure the purpose of plans are kept in mind, decision-maker support is more readily attainable, and impact may more easily and accurately be measured. It is considered as the best way for intelligence analysts to communicate with policymakers and commanders, who are often too busy to read and carefully digest every word of the intelligence products they rely upon to make decisions. Summarizing each paragraph at its beginning allows decision makers to quickly skim intelligence products without sacrificing clarity. Because materials that are not in the BLUF format—such as academic texts—may contain paragraphs with several important ideas located at the beginning, middle, or end, readers who skim these publications may inadvertently miss important information. \n\nThe BLUF approach to sales talk, for example, is also called the elevator speech . It entails that the messenger should be able to pitch a story as the elevator travels from one floor to another, which is approximately 30 seconds or less. \n\nThe following are some tips on using BLUF in project management: \n\nA BLUF allows messengers to \"think through relevant views and understand these ideas as our stakeholders see them\". \n\nBLUF has been used in one program to help to quickly assess the most pressing problem facing a patient. \n\nThe BLUF method is most useful as part of the cognitive-behavioral approaches in primary care to get the physician understand information that may be beneficial for the patient. Communicating the results in a format that subjects can easily understand is paramount. In a medical team setting, each member values speed and brevity. Simon and Folen (2001) suggest using the bottom line up front (BLUF) format—the recommendation first, followed by the backup reasoning or rationale in clear and straightforward terms. A parallel process should be used with the patients. Building on earlier works, Conoley, Padula, Payton, and Daniels (1994), using archived footage of sessions, found that a patient was most likely to implement a recommended treatment if the following three conditions were matched: the recommendation needed to match the problem, should not be too difficult to follow [emphasis added], and should build on a patient's strengths. Patients being counseled tend to follow a treatment plan if, among other things, the recommendation is explained first and followed up with the justification, which are typical features of a BLUF. Expectations with the patients in carrying out a tailored therapy are likely when the benefits are explicitly stated immediately.\n\nSearch engine optimization (SEO) writing is an integral part of online marketing . It differs from other forms of writing since it contains keywords that will help in ranking the website. These keywords should appear naturally in the article. SEO writing is also more structured and may involve complicated instructions for better search engine visibility. When more people view the website, there is a chance for the conversion rate to increase.\n\nThe BLUF model is relevant in SEO writing since it tells the readers what they want to know right away. While the primary goal of SEO writing is to rank higher in the search engines, the primary targets are still human readers. They need to grasp the information immediately. For instance, in a parenting article, the conclusion may be presented in the first paragraph. With the BLUF model, readers will feel the need to read until the end. It is beneficial in SEO writing since the goal is to make the readers go through the information until the end, and eventually heed the calls to action (CTAs). Creative calls to action (CTAs) are also used to point users toward the next step of partnering with a business. \n\nBLUF writing in SEO does not mean there will be no conclusion towards the end of the article. The idea is to write a more succinct version in the starting paragraph.\n\nBLUF communication may also be used in healthcare.\n\nData shows that poor communication comprises 30 percent of all medical malpractice claims filed from 2009 to 2013. Thirty-seven percent of these claims were serious adverse events, such as debilitating conditions (e.g., extended hospital stay, loss of arms or limbs, psychological trauma), and death. These errors result from miscommunications among the members of the medical team, such as when coordinating the treatment plan for the patient. Moreover, these may lead to an increase in negative patient outcomes, and customer dissatisfaction. Thus, there is a need to practice effective communication to significantly avert medical errors and malpractice, and therefore contribute to best health outcomes.\n\nOne common practice in the healthcare setting is the \"hand-off\" procedure. During \"hand-offs\" or \"handovers\" (i.e., change of shift report), critical information about patient care is transferred between the outgoing and the incoming staff. Usually, this process takes place in limited time. Thus, the potential for communication gaps is very likely. One of the strategies to eliminate these gaps is the use of the bottom line up front (BLUF) approach to communication. The BLUF approach is used to customize the information to be transferred as well as the style of \"handoff\" to match the specific needs of patients. Additionally, BLUF communication may also be used during \"code blue\" (a medical emergency such as cardiac or respiratory arrest). Welu (2020) specified that BLUF fosters clarity of communication among members of a group during crisis or emergency situations. Furthermore, the BLUF approach may also be used during referrals of the condition of the patients to another healthcare worker or health service providers, as in the case of nurses to nurses, nurses to physicians, or junior physicians, to attending physicians. When documenting the treatment plan and the actual care interventions that were done to the patients, the BLUF approach may also be useful.\n\nProviding information about the patient's condition together with the appropriate plans that are succinct and straight-to-the-point is vital to ensure that patients experience the best quality of healthcare and best medical outcome possible for them.",
  "Wakanim was a French subscription video on-demand over-the-top streaming service. [ a ]\n\nThe service specialized in online streaming and simulcasting of Japanese anime series. It was also the first platform to offer videos for download without digital rights management on anime series in Europe . The service was discontinued on 3 November 2023.\n\nWakanim was launched on 27 February 2009 after YouTube appeared in France in 2007, and broadcast its first series in October 2010, The World God Only Knows . The aim was to launch simultaneous broadcasting ( simulcast ) of animated series with Japan, as the French market of the Japanese animation did not yet have an adapted legal offer and that it suffered from piracy ( fansub ). \n\nIn October 2013, Wakanim began expanding overseas, with the service extended to the United Kingdom in partnership with British distributor Anime Limited . Wakanim UK was later discontinued in 2014, with Space Dandy being the final title simulcasted in the region. \n\nIn July 2014, Wakanim announced a new service called Wakanim Music which is about Asian music news and would offer music streaming. It was launched in February 2015 but the service is no longer available.\n\nIn March 2015, Aniplex became the company's main shareholder, allowing for Aniplex to enter the French market, and strengthen its European presence. From 2017, Wakanim began expanding internationally. In June 2017, Wakanim established an English-subtitled version for the Nordic countries. In September 2017, Wakanim announced that it would be available for the German-speaking regions with subtitles and dubs in cooperation with the AkibaPass service. In January 2018, Wakanim further expanded by launching a Russian service for Russian-speaking countries and regions. In April 2020, Wakanim expanded its English language service to the Netherlands, with select titles from Wakanim Nordic's catalogue being made available. \n\nIn October 2016, Wakanim offered their first simultaneous French dub with Drifters , in partnership with the French television channel J-One . \n\nOn 24 September 2019, Aniplex and Sony Pictures Television announced that they were consolidating their international anime streaming businesses, with a new joint venture, Funimation Global Group, LLC., with Funimation general manager Colin Decker leading the joint venture. The joint venture would operate under Funimation's branding, and allow Funimation to acquire and distribute titles with Aniplex subsidiaries Wakanim, Madman Anime Group and AnimeLab. The first title under the joint venture, Fate/Grand Order - Absolute Demonic Front: Babylonia , would receive a 30-day exclusivity on FunimationNow, AnimeLab and Wakanim, and provide Funimation exclusive rights to the English dub for one year. Following the merger, Wakanim began offering Funimation SimulDubs in its English language service. \n\nOn 1 March 2022, it was announced that Wakanim, alongside VRV 's and Funimation's SVOD service, would be consolidated into Crunchyroll . \n\nOn 11 March 2022, Crunchyroll and Wakanim announced that they would suspend their services in Russia due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine . \n\nOn 19 September 2023, Wakanim announced that it would be ceasing operations on 3 November 2023, with all content being merged into Crunchyroll. \n\nThe videos are DRM protected which the playback takes place via a proprietary HTML5 player called JW-Player version 8.11.8 (as of February 2020). In June 2015, they announced a revamp version of their website which in October they started to use the new HTML 5 player instead of Flash. Wakanim also have apps for Xbox One , PlayStation 4 , Windows 10 , Apple TV , Amazon Fire TV , iOS and Android platforms. The iOS and Android versions have an offline mode, in which it is possible to download videos and watch them later without internet access. \n\nWhen Wakanim's service was launched, the accessible episodes of series were broadcast in simulcast with Japan on the Internet , in paid mode (by streaming or download without DRM ) and at the same time free of charge for seven days (streaming or download with DRM) after the first broadcast. In March 2016, Wakanim offered access to its catalog with a monthly subscription. \n\nIn June 2017, they changed the way their different offers work. The episodes of the new series are broadcast in simulcast with Japan and are reserved for accounts with a subscription, called \"VIP members\", during the week following their broadcast. The episodes are offered with the best possible quality (up to 4K) and without ads, and after a week, free members can access it with SD quality (480p) and some ads. The old series are available for everyone but with a quality that varies according to the type of account, up to 4K and without ads for VIP members and in SD (480p) with ads for free members. \n\nIn September 2018, they started to offer three-monthly and annually subscription. \n\nWakanim offered series and films which were geographically restricted according to the selected language: ",
  "Mollusca is a phylum of protostomic invertebrate animals , whose members are known as molluscs or mollusks [ a ] ( / ˈ m ɒ l ə s k s / ). Around 76,000 extant species of molluscs are recognized, making it the second-largest animal phylum after Arthropoda . The number of additional fossil species is estimated between 60,000 and 100,000, and the proportion of undescribed species is very high. Many taxa remain poorly studied. \n\nMolluscs are the largest marine phylum, comprising about 23% of all the named marine organisms . They are highly diverse, not just in size and anatomical structure, but also in behaviour and habitat , as numerous groups are freshwater and even terrestrial species. The phylum is typically divided into 7 or 8 taxonomic classes , of which two are entirely extinct . Cephalopod molluscs, such as squid , cuttlefish , and octopuses , are among the most neurologically advanced of all invertebrates —and either the giant squid or the colossal squid is the largest known extant invertebrate species. The gastropods ( snails , slugs and abalone ) are by far the most diverse class and account for 80% of the total classified molluscan species.\n\nThe four most universal features defining modern molluscs are a soft body composed almost entirely of muscle , a mantle with a significant cavity used for breathing and excretion , the presence of a radula (except for bivalves ), and the structure of the nervous system . Other than these common elements, molluscs express great morphological diversity, so many textbooks base their descriptions on a \"hypothetical ancestral mollusc\" (see image below). This has a single, \" limpet -like\" shell on top, which is made of proteins and chitin reinforced with calcium carbonate , and is secreted by a mantle covering the whole upper surface. The underside of the animal consists of a single muscular \"foot\". Although molluscs are coelomates , the coelom tends to be small.\nThe main body cavity is a hemocoel through which blood circulates; as such, their circulatory systems are mainly open . The \"generalized\" mollusc's feeding system consists of a rasping \"tongue\", the radula, and a complex digestive system in which exuded mucus and microscopic, muscle-powered \"hairs\" called cilia play various important roles. The generalized mollusc has two paired nerve cords , or three in bivalves . The brain , in species that have one, encircles the esophagus . Most molluscs have eyes , and all have sensors to detect chemicals, vibrations, and touch . The simplest type of molluscan reproductive system relies on external fertilization , but more complex variations occur. Nearly all produce eggs , from which may emerge trochophore larvae , more complex veliger larvae, or miniature adults. The coelomic cavity is reduced. They have an open circulatory system and kidney-like organs for excretion.\n\nGood evidence exists for the appearance of gastropods, cephalopods , and bivalves in the Cambrian period, 541–485.4 million years ago. However, the evolutionary history both of molluscs' emergence from the ancestral Lophotrochozoa and of their diversification into the well-known living and fossil forms are still subjects of vigorous debate among scientists.\n\nMolluscs have been and still are an important food source for humans. Toxins that can accumulate in certain molluscs under specific conditions create a risk of food poisoning, and many jurisdictions have regulations to reduce this risk. Molluscs have, for centuries, also been the source of important luxury goods, notably pearls , mother of pearl , Tyrian purple dye, and sea silk . Their shells have also been used as money in some preindustrial societies.\n\nA handful of mollusc species are sometimes considered hazards or pests for human activities. The bite of the blue-ringed octopus is often fatal, and that of Enteroctopus dofleini causes inflammation that can last over a month. Stings from a few species of large tropical cone shells of the family Conidae can also kill, but their sophisticated, though easily produced, venoms have become important tools in neurological research. Schistosomiasis (also known as bilharzia, bilharziosis, or snail fever) is transmitted to humans by water snail hosts, and affects about 200 million people. Snails and slugs can also be serious agricultural pests, and accidental or deliberate introduction of some snail species into new environments has seriously damaged some ecosystems .\n\nThe words mollusc and mollusk are both derived from the French mollusque , which originated from the post-classical Latin mollusca , from mollis , soft, first used by J. Jonston (Historiæ Naturalis, 1650) to describe a group comprising cephalopods. Molluscus is used in classical Latin as an adjective only with nux ( nut ) to describe a particular type of soft nut. The use of mollusca in biological taxonomy by Jonston and later Linnaeus may have been influenced by Aristotle 's τὰ μαλάκια ta malákia (the soft ones; < μαλακός malakós \"soft\"), which he applied inter alia to cuttlefish . The scientific study of molluscs is accordingly called malacology . \n\nThe name Molluscoida was formerly used to denote a division of the animal kingdom containing the brachiopods , bryozoans , and tunicates , the members of the three groups having been supposed to somewhat resemble the molluscs. As now known, Brachipoda, Bryozoa and Mollusca are all part of the Lophotrochozoa but have very little relation to the Tunicata, so the name Molluscoida has been abandoned. \n\nThe most universal features of the body structure of molluscs are a mantle with a significant body cavity used for breathing and excretion , and the organization of the nervous system. Many have a calcareous shell. \n\nMolluscs have developed such a varied range of body structures, finding synapomorphies (defining characteristics) to apply to all modern groups is difficult. The most general characteristic of molluscs is they are unsegmented and bilaterally symmetrical. The following are present in all modern molluscs: \n\nOther characteristics that commonly appear in textbooks have significant exceptions:\n\nEstimates of accepted described living species of molluscs vary from 50,000 to a maximum of 120,000 species. The total number of described species is difficult to estimate because of unresolved synonymy . In 1969, David Nicol estimated the probable total number of living mollusc species at 107,000 of which were about 12,000 fresh-water gastropods and 35,000 terrestrial . The Bivalvia would comprise about 14% of the total and the other five classes less than 2% of the living molluscs. In 2009, Chapman estimated the number of described living mollusc species at 85,000. Haszprunar in 2001 estimated about 93,000 named species, which include 23% of all named marine organisms. Molluscs are second only to arthropods in numbers of living animal species —far behind the arthropods' 1,113,000 but well ahead of chordates ' 52,000. : Front endpaper About 200,000 living species in total are estimated, and 70,000 fossil species, although the total number of mollusc species ever to have existed, whether or not preserved, must be many times greater than the number alive today. \n\nMolluscs have more varied forms than any other animal phylum . They include snails , slugs and other gastropods ; clams and other bivalves ; squids and other cephalopods ; and other lesser-known but similarly distinctive subgroups. The majority of species still live in the oceans, from the seashores to the abyssal zone , but some form a significant part of the freshwater fauna and the terrestrial ecosystems . Molluscs are extremely diverse in tropical and temperate regions, but can be found at all latitudes . About 80% of all known mollusc species are gastropods. Cephalopoda such as squid , cuttlefish , and octopuses are among the most neurologically advanced of all invertebrates. The giant squid , which until recently had not been observed alive in its adult form, is one of the largest invertebrates , surpassed in weight but not in length by the colossal squid . \n\nFreshwater and terrestrial molluscs appear exceptionally vulnerable to extinction. Estimates of the numbers of non-marine molluscs vary widely, partly because many regions have not been thoroughly surveyed. There is also a shortage of specialists who can identify all the animals in any one area to species. However, in 2004 the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species included nearly 2,000 endangered non-marine molluscs. For comparison, the great majority of mollusc species are marine, but only 41 of these appeared on the 2004 Red List. About 42% of recorded extinctions since the year 1500 are of molluscs, consisting almost entirely of non-marine species. \n\nBecause of the great range of anatomical diversity among molluscs, many textbooks start the subject of molluscan anatomy by describing what is called an archi-mollusc , hypothetical generalized mollusc , or hypothetical ancestral mollusc ( HAM ) to illustrate the most common features found within the phylum. The depiction is visually rather similar to modern monoplacophorans . \n\nThe generalized mollusc is an unsegmented, bilaterally symmetrical animal and has a single, \" limpet -like\" shell on top. The shell is secreted by a mantle covering the upper surface. The underside consists of a single muscular \"foot\". The visceral mass, or visceropallium, is the soft, nonmuscular metabolic region of the mollusc. It contains the body organs. \n\nThe mantle cavity, a fold in the mantle, encloses a significant amount of space. It is lined with epidermis, and is exposed, according to habitat , to sea, fresh water or air. The cavity was at the rear in the earliest molluscs, but its position now varies from group to group. The anus , a pair of osphradia (chemical sensors) in the incoming \"lane\", the hindmost pair of gills and the exit openings of the nephridia (kidneys) known as \"Organs of bojanus\" and gonads (reproductive organs) are in the mantle cavity. The whole soft body of bivalves lies within an enlarged mantle cavity. \n\nThe mantle edge secretes a shell (secondarily absent in a number of taxonomic groups, such as the nudibranchs ) that consists of mainly chitin and conchiolin (a protein hardened with calcium carbonate ), except the outermost layer, which in almost all cases is all conchiolin (see periostracum ). Molluscs never use phosphate to construct their hard parts, with the questionable exception of Cobcrephora . While most mollusc shells are composed mainly of aragonite , those gastropods that lay eggs with a hard shell use calcite (sometimes with traces of aragonite) to construct the eggshells. \n\nThe shell consists of three layers: the outer layer (the periostracum ) made of organic matter, a middle layer made of columnar calcite , and an inner layer consisting of laminated calcite, often nacreous . \n\nIn some forms the shell contains openings. In abalone there are holes in the shell used for respiration and the release of egg and sperm, in the nautilus a string of tissue called the siphuncle goes through all the chambers, and the eight plates that make up the shell of chitons are penetrated with living tissue with nerves and sensory structures. The earliest-derived living mollusca, the Polyplacophora (chitons) and shell-less vermiform Aplacophora, remains contentious despite many developmental and molecular studies of these organisms. Both studies investigated molluscan phylogeny through synthesis of paleontological and neontological data, and the other being large and small-subunit nuclear rRna sequences. Another article describing the chitons, with their shells, this time, is one by D K Jacobs and others, where shell evolution of molluscs and chitons are examined to visualize the evolution of the chiton, from the Polyplacophora, to the Aplacophora, and others. \n\nThe body of a mollusc has a ventral muscular foot, which is adapted to different purposes (locomotion, grasping the substratum, burrowing or feeding) in different classes. The foot carries a pair of statocysts , which act as balance sensors. In gastropods, it secretes mucus as a lubricant to aid movement. In forms having only a top shell, such as limpets , the foot acts as a sucker attaching the animal to a hard surface, and the vertical muscles clamp the shell down over it; in other molluscs, the vertical muscles pull the foot and other exposed soft parts into the shell. In bivalves, the foot is adapted for burrowing into the sediment; in cephalopods it is used for jet propulsion, and the tentacles and arms are derived from the foot. \n\nMost molluscs' circulatory systems are mainly open , except for cephalopods , whose circulatory systems are closed . Although molluscs are coelomates , their coeloms are reduced to fairly small spaces enclosing the heart and gonads. The main body cavity is a hemocoel through which blood and coelomic fluid circulate and which encloses most of the other internal organs. These hemocoelic spaces act as an efficient hydrostatic skeleton . The blood of these molluscs contains the respiratory pigment hemocyanin as an oxygen -carrier. The heart consists of one or more pairs of atria ( auricles ), which receive oxygenated blood from the gills and pump it to the ventricle , which pumps it into the aorta (main artery ), which is fairly short and opens into the hemocoel. The atria of the heart also function as part of the excretory system by filtering waste products out of the blood and dumping it into the coelom as urine . A pair of metanephridia (\"little kidneys\") to the rear of and connected to the coelom extracts any re-usable materials from the urine and dumps additional waste products into it, and then ejects it via tubes that discharge into the mantle cavity. \n\nExceptions to the above are the molluscs Planorbidae or ram's horn snails, which are air-breathing snails that use iron-based hemoglobin instead of the copper-based hemocyanin to carry oxygen through their blood.\n\nMost molluscs have only one pair of gills, or even only a singular gill. Generally, the gills are rather like feathers in shape, although some species have gills with filaments on only one side. They divide the mantle cavity so water enters near the bottom and exits near the top. Their filaments have three kinds of cilia, one of which drives the water current through the mantle cavity, while the other two help to keep the gills clean. If the osphradia detect noxious chemicals or possibly sediment entering the mantle cavity, the gills' cilia may stop beating until the unwelcome intrusions have ceased. Each gill has an incoming blood vessel connected to the hemocoel and an outgoing one to the heart. \n\nMolluscs use intracellular digestion . Most molluscs have muscular mouths with radulae , \"tongues\", bearing many rows of chitinous teeth, which are replaced from the rear as they wear out. The radula primarily functions to scrape bacteria and algae off rocks, and is associated with the odontophore , a cartilaginous supporting organ. The radula is unique to the molluscs and has no equivalent in any other animal.\n\nMolluscs' mouths also contain glands that secrete slimy mucus , to which the food sticks. Beating cilia (tiny \"hairs\") drive the mucus towards the stomach, so the mucus forms a long string called a \"food string\". \n\nAt the tapered rear end of the stomach and projecting slightly into the hindgut is the prostyle, a backward-pointing cone of feces and mucus, which is rotated by further cilia so it acts as a bobbin, winding the mucus string onto itself. Before the mucus string reaches the prostyle, the acidity of the stomach makes the mucus less sticky and frees particles from it. \n\nThe particles are sorted by yet another group of cilia, which send the smaller particles, mainly minerals, to the prostyle so eventually they are excreted, while the larger ones, mainly food, are sent to the stomach's cecum (a pouch with no other exit) to be digested. The sorting process is by no means perfect. \n\nPeriodically, circular muscles at the hindgut's entrance pinch off and excrete a piece of the prostyle, preventing the prostyle from growing too large. The anus, in the part of the mantle cavity, is swept by the outgoing \"lane\" of the current created by the gills. Carnivorous molluscs usually have simpler digestive systems. \n\nAs the head has largely disappeared in bivalves, the mouth has been equipped with labial palps (two on each side of the mouth) to collect the detritus from its mucus. \n\nThe cephalic molluscs have two pairs of main nerve cords organized around a number of paired ganglia, the visceral cords serving the internal organs and the pedal ones serving the foot. Most pairs of corresponding ganglia on both sides of the body are linked by commissures (relatively large bundles of nerves). The ganglia above the gut are the cerebral, the pleural, and the visceral, which are located above the esophagus (gullet). The pedal ganglia, which control the foot, are below the esophagus and their commissure and connectives to the cerebral and pleural ganglia surround the esophagus in a circumesophageal nerve ring or nerve collar . : 284–291\n\nThe acephalic molluscs (i.e., bivalves) also have this ring but it is less obvious and less important. The bivalves have only three pairs of ganglia—cerebral, pedal, and visceral—with the visceral as the largest and most important of the three functioning as the principal center of \"thinking\". Some such as the scallops have eyes around the edges of their shells which connect to a pair of looped nerves and which provide the ability to distinguish between light and shadow.\n\nThe simplest molluscan reproductive system relies on external fertilization , but with more complex variations. All produce eggs, from which may emerge trochophore larvae, more complex veliger larvae, or miniature adults. Two gonads sit next to the coelom , a small cavity that surrounds the heart, into which they shed ova or sperm . The nephridia extract the gametes from the coelom and emit them into the mantle cavity. Molluscs that use such a system remain of one sex all their lives and rely on external fertilization . Some molluscs use internal fertilization and/or are hermaphrodites , functioning as both sexes; both of these methods require more complex reproductive systems. C. obtusus is an endemic snail species of the Eastern Alps . There is strong evidence for self-fertilization in the easternmost snail populations of this species. \n\nThe most basic molluscan larva is a trochophore , which is planktonic and feeds on floating food particles by using the two bands of cilia around its \"equator\" to sweep food into the mouth, which uses more cilia to drive them into the stomach, which uses further cilia to expel undigested remains through the anus. New tissue grows in the bands of mesoderm in the interior, so the apical tuft and anus are pushed further apart as the animal grows. The trochophore stage is often succeeded by a veliger stage in which the prototroch , the \"equatorial\" band of cilia nearest the apical tuft, develops into the velum (\"veil\"), a pair of cilia-bearing lobes with which the larva swims. Eventually, the larva sinks to the seafloor and metamorphoses into the adult form. While metamorphosis is the usual state in molluscs, the cephalopods differ in exhibiting direct development: the hatchling is a 'miniaturized' form of the adult. The development of molluscs is of particular interest in the field of ocean acidification as environmental stress is recognized to affect the settlement, metamorphosis, and survival of larvae. \n\nMost molluscs are herbivorous, grazing on algae or filter feeders. For those grazing, two feeding strategies are predominant. Some feed on microscopic, filamentous algae, often using their radula as a 'rake' to comb up filaments from the sea floor. Others feed on macroscopic 'plants' such as kelp, rasping the plant surface with its radula. To employ this strategy, the plant has to be large enough for the mollusc to 'sit' on, so smaller macroscopic plants are not as often eaten as their larger counterparts. Filter feeders are molluscs that feed by straining suspended matter and food particles from water, typically by passing the water over their gills. Most bivalves are filter feeders, which can be measured through clearance rates. Research has demonstrated that environmental stress can affect the feeding of bivalves by altering the energy budget of organisms. \n\nCephalopods are primarily predatory, and the radula takes a secondary role to the jaws and tentacles in food acquisition. The monoplacophoran Neopilina uses its radula in the usual fashion, but its diet includes protists such as the xenophyophore Stannophyllum . Sacoglossan sea-slugs suck the sap from algae, using their one-row radula to pierce the cell walls, whereas dorid nudibranchs and some Vetigastropoda feed on sponges and others feed on hydroids . (An extensive list of molluscs with unusual feeding habits is available in the appendix of GRAHAM, A. (1955). \"Molluscan diets\" . Journal of Molluscan Studies . 31 ( 3– 4): 144. )\n\nOpinions vary about the number of classes of molluscs; for example, the table below shows seven living classes, and two extinct ones. Although they are unlikely to form a clade, some older works combine the Caudofoveata and Solenogasters into one class, the Aplacophora . : 291–292 Two of the commonly recognized \"classes\" are known only from fossils. \n\nBrachiopods\n\nBivalves\n\nMonoplacophorans (\"limpet-like\", \"living fossils\")\n\nScaphopods (tusk shells)\n\nGastropods ( snails , slugs , limpets , sea hares )\n\nCephalopods ( nautiloids , ammonites , octopus , squid , etc.)\n\nAplacophorans (spicule-covered, worm-like)\n\nPolyplacophorans (chitons)\n\nWiwaxia\n\nHalkieria\n\n† Orthrozanclus\n\n† Odontogriphus\n\nThe phylogeny (evolutionary \"family tree\") of molluscs is a controversial subject. In addition to the debates about whether Kimberella and any of the \" halwaxiids \" were molluscs or closely related to molluscs, debates arise about the relationships between the classes of living molluscs. In fact, some groups traditionally classified as molluscs may have to be redefined as distinct but related. \n\nMolluscs are generally regarded members of the Lophotrochozoa , a group defined by having trochophore larvae and, in the case of living Lophophorata , a feeding structure called a lophophore . The other members of the Lophotrochozoa are the annelid worms and seven marine phyla . The diagram on the right summarizes a phylogeny presented in 2007 without the annelid worms.\n\nBecause the relationships between the members of the family tree are uncertain, it is difficult to identify the features inherited from the last common ancestor of all molluscs. For example, it is uncertain whether the ancestral mollusc was metameric (composed of repeating units)—if it was, that would suggest an origin from an annelid -like worm. Scientists disagree about this: Giribet and colleagues concluded, in 2006, the repetition of gills and of the foot's retractor muscles were later developments, while in 2007, Sigwart concluded the ancestral mollusc was metameric, and it had a foot used for creeping and a \"shell\" that was mineralized. In one particular branch of the family tree, the shell of conchiferans is thought to have evolved from the spicules (small spines) of aplacophorans ; but this is difficult to reconcile with the embryological origins of spicules. \n\nThe molluscan shell appears to have originated from a mucus coating, which eventually stiffened into a cuticle . This would have been impermeable and thus forced the development of more sophisticated respiratory apparatus in the form of gills. Eventually, the cuticle would have become mineralized, using the same genetic machinery ( engrailed ) as most other bilaterian skeletons . The first mollusc shell almost certainly was reinforced with the mineral aragonite . \n\nClassification into higher taxa for molluscan classes has been and remains problematic. Numerous different clades have been proposed but few have received strong support. Traditionally, Mollusca is split into two subphyla, Conchifera and Aculifera , based on the presence of a shell. The \"Testaria\" hypothesis is similar, but includes chitons with the rest of the conchiferans. Some studies completely reject the proposal, instead favoring a \"Serialia\" hypothesis which classifies chitons and monoplacophorans as closely related.\n\nPolyplacophora\n\nCaudofoveata\n\nSolenogastres\n\nMonoplacophora\n\nCephalopoda\n\nBivalvia\n\nGastropoda\n\nScaphopoda\n\nBivalvia\n\nGastropoda\n\nMonoplacophora\n\nPolyplacophora\n\nScaphopoda\n\nCaudofoveata\n\nCephalopoda\n\nSolenogastres\n\nMorphological analyses tend to recover a conchiferan clade that receives less support from molecular analyses, although these results also lead to unexpected paraphylies, for instance scattering the bivalves throughout all other mollusc groups. \n\nHowever, an analysis in 2009 using both morphological and molecular phylogenetics comparisons concluded the molluscs are not monophyletic ; in particular, Scaphopoda and Bivalvia are both separate, monophyletic lineages unrelated to the remaining molluscan classes; the traditional phylum Mollusca is polyphyletic , and it can only be made monophyletic if scaphopods and bivalves are excluded. A 2010 analysis recovered the traditional conchiferan and aculiferan groups, and showed molluscs were monophyletic, demonstrating that available data for solenogastres was contaminated. Current molecular data are insufficient to constrain the molluscan phylogeny, and since the methods used to determine the confidence in clades are prone to overestimation, it is risky to place too much emphasis even on the areas of which different studies agree. Rather than eliminating unlikely relationships, the latest studies add new permutations of internal molluscan relationships, even bringing the conchiferan hypothesis into question. \n\nA 2025 analysis, using newly sequenced genomes, supports the Aculifera-Conchifera hypothesis. Scaphopoda was recovered sister to Bivalvia, and Cephalopoda as sister to the Bivalvia-Scaphopoda-Gastropoda clade. \n\nGood evidence exists for the appearance of gastropods (e.g., Aldanella ), cephalopods (e.g., Plectronoceras , Nectocaris ?) and bivalves ( Pojetaia , Fordilla ) towards the middle of the Cambrian period, c. 500 million years ago , though arguably each of these may belong only to the stem lineage of their respective classes. However, the evolutionary history both of the emergence of molluscs from the ancestral group Lophotrochozoa , and of their diversification into the well-known living and fossil forms, is still vigorously debated.\n\nDebate occurs about whether some Ediacaran and Early Cambrian fossils really are molluscs. Kimberella , from about 555 million years ago , has been described by some paleontologists as \"mollusc-like\", but others are unwilling to go further than \"probable bilaterian \", if that. \n\nThere is an even sharper debate about whether Wiwaxia , from about 505 million years ago , was a mollusc, and much of this centers on whether its feeding apparatus was a type of radula or more similar to that of some polychaete worms. Nicholas Butterfield, who opposes the idea that Wiwaxia was a mollusc, has written that earlier microfossils from 515 to 510 million years ago are fragments of a genuinely mollusc-like radula. This appears to contradict the concept that the ancestral molluscan radula was mineralized. \n\nHowever, the helcionellids , which first appear over 540 million years ago in Early Cambrian rocks from Siberia and China, are thought to be early molluscs with rather snail-like shells. Shelled molluscs therefore predate the earliest trilobites . Although most helcionellid fossils are only a few millimeters long, specimens a few centimeters long have also been found, most with more limpet -like shapes. The tiny specimens have been suggested to be juveniles and the larger ones adults. \n\nSome analyses of helcionellids concluded these were the earliest gastropods . However, other scientists are not convinced these Early Cambrian fossils show clear signs of the torsion that identifies modern gastropods twists the internal organs so the anus lies above the head. : 300–343 \n\nVolborthella , some fossils of which predate 530 million years ago , was long thought to be a cephalopod, but discoveries of more detailed fossils showed its shell was not secreted, but built from grains of the mineral silicon dioxide (silica), and it was not divided into a series of compartments by septa as those of fossil shelled cephalopods and the living Nautilus are. Volborthella ' s classification is uncertain. The Middle Cambrian fossil Nectocaris is often interpreted as a cephalopod with 2 arms and no shell, but the Late Cambrian fossil Plectronoceras is now thought to be the earliest undisputed cephalopod fossil, as its shell had septa and a siphuncle , a strand of tissue that Nautilus uses to remove water from compartments it has vacated as it grows, and which is also visible in fossil ammonite shells. However, Plectronoceras and other early cephalopods crept along the seafloor instead of swimming, as their shells contained a \"ballast\" of stony deposits on what is thought to be the underside, and had stripes and blotches on what is thought to be the upper surface. All cephalopods with external shells except the nautiloids became extinct by the end of the Cretaceous period 65 million years ago . However, the shell-less Coleoidea ( squid , octopus , cuttlefish ) are abundant today. \n\nThe Early Cambrian fossils Fordilla and Pojetaia are regarded as bivalves . \"Modern-looking\" bivalves appeared in the Ordovician period, 488 to 443 million years ago . One bivalve group, the rudists , became major reef -builders in the Cretaceous, but became extinct in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event . Even so, bivalves remain abundant and diverse.\n\nThe Hyolitha are a class of extinct animals with a shell and operculum that may be molluscs. Authors who suggest they deserve their own phylum do not comment on the position of this phylum in the tree of life. \n\nFor millennia, molluscs have been a source of food for humans, as well as important luxury goods, notably pearls , mother of pearl , Tyrian purple dye, sea silk , and chemical compounds. Their shells have also been used as a form of currency in some preindustrial societies. Some species of molluscs can bite or sting humans, and some have become agricultural pests.\n\nMolluscs, especially bivalves such as clams and mussels , have been an important food source since at least the advent of anatomically modern humans , and this has often resulted in overfishing. Other commonly eaten molluscs include octopuses and squids , whelks , oysters , and scallops . In 2005, China accounted for 80% of the global mollusc catch, netting almost 11,000,000 tonnes (11,000,000 long tons; 12,000,000 short tons). Within Europe, France remained the industry leader. Some countries regulate importation and handling of molluscs and other seafood , mainly to minimize the poison risk from toxins that can sometimes accumulate in the animals. \n\nMost molluscs with shells can produce pearls, but only the pearls of bivalves and some gastropods , whose shells are lined with nacre , are valuable. : 300–343, 367–403 The best natural pearls are produced by marine pearl oysters , Pinctada margaritifera and Pinctada mertensi , which live in the tropical and subtropical waters of the Pacific Ocean . Natural pearls form when a small foreign object gets stuck between the mantle and shell.\n\nThe two methods of culturing pearls insert either \"seeds\" or beads into oysters. The \"seed\" method uses grains of ground shell from freshwater mussels , and overharvesting for this purpose has endangered several freshwater mussel species in the southeastern United States. : 367–403 The pearl industry is so important in some areas, significant sums of money are spent on monitoring the health of farmed molluscs. \n\nOther luxury and high- status products were made from molluscs. Tyrian purple , made from the ink glands of murex shells, \"fetched its weight in silver\" in the fourth century BC , according to Theopompus . The discovery of large numbers of Murex shells on Crete suggests the Minoans may have pioneered the extraction of \"imperial purple\" during the Middle Minoan period in the 20th–18th centuries BC, centuries before the Tyrians . Sea silk is a fine, rare, and valuable fabric produced from the long silky threads ( byssus ) secreted by several bivalve molluscs, particularly Pinna nobilis , to attach themselves to the sea bed. Procopius , writing on the Persian wars circa 550 CE , \"stated that the five hereditary satraps (governors) of Armenia who received their insignia from the Roman Emperor were given chlamys (or cloaks) made from lana pinna . Apparently, only the ruling classes were allowed to wear these chlamys.\" \n\nMollusc shells, including those of cowries , were used as a kind of money ( shell money ) in several preindustrial societies. However, these \"currencies\" generally differed in important ways from the standardized government-backed and -controlled money familiar to industrial societies. Some shell \"currencies\" were not used for commercial transactions, but mainly as social status displays at important occasions, such as weddings. When used for commercial transactions, they functioned as a means of exchange similar to money in ordinary business transactions , a tradable good whose value differed from place to place, often as a result of difficulties in transport, and which was vulnerable to incurable inflation if more efficient transport or \"goldrush\" behavior appeared. \n\nBivalve molluscs are used as bioindicators to monitor the health of aquatic environments in both fresh water and the marine environments. Their population status or structure, physiology, behaviour or the level of contamination with elements or compounds can indicate the state of contamination status of the ecosystem. They are particularly useful since they are sessile so that they are representative of the environment where they are sampled or placed. Potamopyrgus antipodarum is used by some water treatment plants to test for estrogen-mimicking pollutants from industrial agriculture.\nSeveral species of mollusca have been used as bioindicators of environmental stresses that can cause DNA damage. These species include the American oyster Crassostrea virginica , zebra mussels ( Dreissena polymorpha ) and the blue mussel Mytilus edulis . \n\nSome molluscs sting or bite, but deaths from mollusc venoms total less than 10% of those from jellyfish stings. \n\nAll octopuses are venomous, but only a few species pose a significant threat to humans. Blue-ringed octopuses in the genus Hapalochlaena , which live around Australia and New Guinea, bite humans only if severely provoked, but their venom kills 25% of human victims. Another tropical species, Octopus apollyon , causes severe inflammation that can last for over a month even if treated correctly, and the bite of Octopus rubescens can cause necrosis that lasts longer than one month if untreated, and headaches and weakness persisting for up to a week even if treated. \n\nAll species of cone snails are venomous and can sting painfully when handled, although many species are too small to pose much of a risk to humans, and only a few fatalities have been reliably reported. Their venom is a complex mixture of toxins , some fast-acting and others slower but deadlier. The effects of individual cone-shell toxins on victims' nervous systems are so precise as to be useful tools for research in neurology , and the small size of their molecules makes it easy to synthesize them. \n\nSchistosomiasis (also known as bilharzia, bilharziosis or snail fever), a disease caused by the fluke worm Schistosoma , is \"second only to malaria as the most devastating parasitic disease in tropical countries. An estimated 200 million people in 74 countries are infected with the disease—100 million in Africa alone.\" The parasite has 13 known species, two of which infect humans. The parasite itself is not a mollusc, but all the species have freshwater snails as intermediate hosts . \n\nSome species of molluscs, particularly certain snails and slugs , can be serious crop pests, and when introduced into new environments, can unbalance local ecosystems . One such pest, the giant African snail Achatina fulica , has been introduced to many parts of Asia, as well as to many islands in the Indian Ocean and Pacific Ocean . In the 1990s, this species reached the West Indies . Attempts to control it by introducing the predatory snail Euglandina rosea proved disastrous, as the predator ignored Achatina fulica and went on to extirpate several native snail species instead. ",
  "This article discusses political parties in Russia .\n\nThe Russian Federation has a de jure multi-party system , however it operates as a dominant-party system . As of 2020 [update] , six parties have members in the federal parliament, the State Duma , with one dominant party ( United Russia ). As of July 2023 [update] , 27 political parties are officially registered in the Russian Federation, 25 of which have the right to participate in elections. \n\nAfter the Perestroika reforms in the 1980s Russia had over 100 registered parties , but the people elected to the State Duma represented only a small number of parties. After 2000, during Vladimir Putin 's first presidency (2000–2008), the number of parties quickly decreased. From 2008 to 2012 there were only seven parties in Russia, and every new attempt to register new parties was blocked. The last registered party of this period was the government-organized Right Cause (now the Party of Growth) which was registered on 18 February 2009. Before the 2011 parliamentary election , about 10 opposition parties were denied registration.\n\nIn 2001, the federal law \"On political parties\" was adopted. All parties had to be re-registered. Parties have been assigned the status of the only type of public association that has the right to independently nominate candidates for deputies and other elective positions in government bodies. One of the major provisions of the law is the establishment of a single national status of a political party, and, as a result, the liquidation of regional and interregional political public associations. According to paragraph 1 of Article 3 of the Federal Law of the Russian Federation No. 95-FZ “On Political Parties”, a political party in Russia is recognized as \"a public association created for the purpose of participation of citizens of the Russian Federation in the political life of society through the formation and expression of their political will, participation in public and political actions, in elections and referendums, as well as in order to represent the interests of citizens in state authorities and local governments\". \n\nIn December 2004, amendments were introduced requiring a minimum number of party members of 50,000 and the presence of more than 45 regional branches of 500 people each. By January 1, 2006, all parties had to submit documents proving that their party structures complied with the requirements of the law on the minimum number of members and the number of regional branches. \n\nIn 2009, a bill was introduced to reduce the minimum number of party members from 50,000 to 45,000, and from 500 to 450 members in regional branches. This law came into effect on January 1, 2010. The minimum number of party members was reduced again on January 1, 2012, to 40,000 and to 400 members per regional branch. \n\nOn February 28, 2012, an election law was adopted meaning parties were exempted from collecting signatures and making a cash deposit for nominating a party and its candidate, and gubernatorial elections were restored. The number of required signatures for candidates for the presidential elections was reduced from 2 million to 100,000 for party candidates, and 300,000 for self-nominated candidates. The electoral threshold for parties was also reduced from 7% to 5%. \n\nOn March 20, 2012, the State Duma approved a presidential bill to reduce the minimum number of political party members from 40,000 to only 500 people, and from 500 to 5 members for a regional branch.\n\nHowever, after a series of mass protests and a 2011 European Court decision on the case of the Republican Party of Russia (now the People's Freedom Party), the law changed and the number of registered parties quickly increased to more than 48 as of December 2012 [update] .\n\nA \" party of power \" refers to a political party that has a close relationship with the executive branch of government such that the party appears to function as an extension of the executive rather than as an autonomous political organization. The concept resembles that of a cartel party . These parties are considered by some to have been especially established for support of the incumbent president or prime minister in the Russian parliament :\n\nAccording to studies, United Russia voters in 2007 were younger and more market-oriented than the average voter. The party's electorate includes a substantial share of government employees , pensioners and military personnel , who are dependent on the state for their livelihood. Sixty-four percent of United Russia supporters are female. In the run-up to the 2011 Duma elections, it was reported that support for United Russia was growing among young people. \n\nIn April 2023, a survey on the issue of the dissolution of the United Russia Party was conducted among Russians . About 2,500 people participated in the survey, mostly aged 45+. The question was \"Is it necessary to dissolve the United Russia party with the inability of its members to participate in political life in the future?\" the answers were distributed as follows: 65% stated: \"I am for dissolution without permission to participate in political life in the future\", 3% stated \"I am against dissolution\", 6% stated \"I am for dissolution, but with permission to participate in political life in the future\", and 26% stated \"I am for the dissolution of all bourgeois parties\". \n\nAll parties registered with the Ministry of Justice have the right to participate in any elections across the country. A list of registered parties is placed on the Ministry website. In December 2012, there were 48 registered parties in Russia; 7 of them are currently represented in the State Duma as of 2021.\n\nDecentralization Russophilia\n\nAndrey Isaev [ ru ] Igor Podshivalov [ ru ] Alexander Shubin Vladlen Tupikin [ ru ]\n\nRevolutionary Party of Сommunists [ ru ] Революционная партия коммунистов\n\nFactions: Stalinism Anti-communism\n\nSyncretic\n\nValery Ronkin [ ru ]\n\nAndrei Fadin [ ru ] Pavel Kudyukin [ ru ]\n\nEurocommunism (faction)",
  "Ceremonial dancing has a very important place in the Indigenous cultures of Australia. They vary from place to place, but most ceremonies combine dance, song, rituals and often elaborate body decorations and costumes. The different body paintings indicate the type of ceremony being performed. They play an important role in marriage ceremonies, in the education of Indigenous children, as well as storytelling and oral history. The term corroboree is commonly used to refer to Australian Aboriginal dances, although this term has its origins among the people of the Sydney region. In some places, Aboriginal people perform corroborees for tourists. In the latter part of the 20th century the influence of Indigenous Australian dance traditions has been seen with the development of concert dance, with the Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts (ACPA) providing training in contemporary dance.\n\nThe Australian bush dance , which draws on traditions from English, Irish, Scottish and other European dance styles, is also a common community activity. Favourite dances include the Irish Céilidh \"Pride of Erin\" and the quadrille \" The Lancers \". Locally originated dances include the \"Waves of Bondi\", the Melbourne Shuffle and New Vogue .\n\nThe Australian Ballet is the foremost classical ballet company in Australia. It began in 1962 and is today recognised as one of the world's major international ballet companies. It is based in Melbourne and performs works from the classical repertoire as well as contemporary works by major Australian and international choreographers.\n\nTraditional Aboriginal Australian dance was closely associated with song and was understood and experienced as making present the reality of the Dreamtime . In some instances, they would imitate the actions of a particular animal as part of telling a story. For the people in their own country it defined roles, responsibilities and the place itself. These ritual performances gave them an understanding of themselves in the interplay of social, geographical and environmental forces. The performances were associated with specific places and dance grounds were often sacred places. The body decoration and specific gestures related to kin and other relationships, such as to Dreamtime beings. Some groups hold their dances secret or sacred. Gender is an important factor in some ceremonies with men and women having separate ceremonial traditions, such as the Crane Dance. \n\nThe term \" corroboree \" is commonly used by non- Indigenous Australians to refer to any Aboriginal dance, although this term has its origins among the people of the Sydney region. In some places, Australian Aboriginal people perform corroborees for tourists. [ page needed ]\n\nFor Torres Strait Islander people, singing and dancing is their \"literature\" – \"the most important aspect of Torres Strait lifestyle. The Torres Strait Islanders preserve and present their oral history through songs and dances;...the dances act as illustrative material and, of course, the dancer himself [sic] is the storyteller\" (Ephraim Bani, 1979). There are many songs about the weather; others about the myths and legends; life in the sea and totemic gods; and about important events. \"The dancing and its movements express the songs and acts as the illustrative material\". \n\nIn the latter part of the 20th century, the influence of Indigenous Australian dance traditions was seen with the development of concert dance, particularly in contemporary dance with the National Aboriginal and Islander Skills Development Association (established 1975) and the Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts (ACPA, founded 1997) providing training to Indigenous Australians in dance, and the Bangarra Dance Theatre (founded 1989). [ citation needed ] With a new sense of pride emerging in a number of Aboriginal organisations in Redfern , Sydney, the Aboriginal Dance Theatre Redfern (ADTR) was established in 1979. \n\nThe establishment of National Aboriginal Dance Council Australia (NADCA, also referred to as National Aboriginal Dance Council of Australia ) was instigated by Christine Donnelly and ADTR in 1995. It was supported by Ausdance in their presentation of the presentation of three major Indigenous dance conferences. The second one was held in Adelaide in 1997, where cultural and intellectual property rights and copyright issues for Australian Indigenous dancers were discussed, and included a free outdoor performance in Rymill Park / Murlawirrapurka . The third conference took place in Sydney in 1999, funded by the Australia Council . Both the 2nd and 3rd conferences were attended by David Gulpilil 's dance troupe. [ citation needed ]\n\nNADCA was still in existence in 2007, when it was in the process of developing a document on \"Cultural Protocols on Aboriginal Dance\". \n\nBush dance has developed in Australia as a form of traditional dance, it draws on traditions from English, Irish, Scottish and other European dance. Favourite dances in the community include dances of European descent, such as the Irish Céilidh \"Pride of Erin\" and the quadrille \" The Lancers \". Locally originated dances include the \"Waves of Bondi\", the Melbourne Shuffle and New Vogue .\n\nMany immigrant communities continue their own dance traditions on a professional or amateur basis. Traditional dances from a large number of ethnic backgrounds are danced in Australia, helped by the presence of enthusiastic immigrants and their Australian-born families. It is quite common to see dances from the Baltic region, as well as Scottish, Irish, Indian, Indonesian or African dance being taught at community centres and dance schools in Australia.\n\nStill more dance groups in Australia employ dances from a variety of backgrounds, including reconstructed European Court dances and Medieval Dance, as well as fusions of traditional steps with modern music and style.\n\nThe Australian Ballet is the foremost classical ballet company in Australia. Its inaugural artistic director was the English-born dancer, teacher and repetiteur Dame Peggy van Praagh in 1962 and is today recognised as one of the world's major international ballet companies. It is based in Melbourne and performs works from the classical repertoire as well as contemporary works by major Australian and international choreographers. As of 2010, it was presenting approximately 200 performances in cities and regional areas around Australia each year as well as international tours. Regular venues include: the Arts Centre Melbourne , Sydney Opera House , Sydney Theatre , Adelaide Festival Centre and Queensland Performing Arts Centre . Robert Helpmann is among Australia's best-known ballerinos.\n\nBaz Luhrmann 's popular 1992 film Strictly Ballroom , starring Paul Mercurio , contributed to an increased interest in dance competition in Australia, and popular dance shows such as So You Think You Can Dance have featured on television in recent years.\n\nThe Nutbush is a classic Australian line dance —typically performed to the American song \" Nutbush City Limits \" by Ike & Tina Turner —was created in the 1970s disco era; it took off in Australia during the 1980s, and it has seen sustained success to this day, including gaining viral popularity internationally through TikTok . A common way of first hearing the song is when schools typically make students dance to it as part of a physical education .\n\nThose dance companies funded by the Major Performing Arts Board of the Australia Council and from state arts agencies are:",
  "Yale University is a private Ivy League research university in New Haven, Connecticut , United States. Founded in 1701, Yale is the third-oldest institution of higher education in the United States , and one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution . \n\nYale was established as the Collegiate School in 1701 by Congregationalist clergy of the Connecticut Colony . Originally restricted to instructing ministers in theology and sacred languages , the school's curriculum expanded, incorporating humanities and sciences by the time of the American Revolution . In the 19th century, the college expanded into graduate and professional instruction, awarding the first PhD in the United States in 1861 and organizing as a university in 1887. Yale's faculty and student populations grew rapidly after 1890 due to the expansion of the physical campus and its scientific research programs.\n\nYale is organized into fifteen constituent schools, including the original undergraduate college , the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , and Yale Law School . While the university is governed by the Yale Corporation , each school's faculty oversees its curriculum and degree programs. In addition to a central campus in downtown New Haven , the university owns athletic facilities in western New Haven, a campus in West Haven , and forests and nature preserves throughout New England . As of 2023 [update] , the university's endowment was valued at $40.7 billion , the third largest of any educational institution . The Yale University Library , serving all constituent schools, holds more than 15 million volumes and is the third-largest academic library in the United States. Student athletes compete in intercollegiate sports as the Yale Bulldogs in the NCAA Division I Ivy League conference.\n\nAs of October 2024 [update] , 68 Nobel laureates, 5 Fields medalists , 4 Abel Prize laureates, and 3 Turing Award winners have been affiliated with Yale University. In addition, Yale has graduated many notable alumni , including 5 U.S. presidents , 10 Founding Fathers , 19 U.S. Supreme Court Justices , 31 living billionaires , 54 college founders and presidents , many heads of state , cabinet members and governors . Hundreds of members of Congress and many U.S. diplomats , 96 MacArthur Fellows , 263 Rhodes Scholars , 123 Marshall Scholars , 81 Gates Cambridge Scholars , 102 Guggenheim Fellows and 9 Mitchell Scholars have been affiliated with the university. Yale's current faculty include 67 members of the National Academy of Sciences , 55 members of the National Academy of Medicine , 8 members of the National Academy of Engineering , and 193 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . \n\nYale traces its beginnings to \"An Act for Liberty to Erect a Collegiate School\", a would-be charter passed in New Haven by the General Court of the Colony of Connecticut on October 9, 1701. The Act was an effort to create an institution to train ministers and lay leadership. Soon after, a group of ten Congregational ministers, Samuel Andrew , Thomas Buckingham, Israel Chauncy, Samuel Mather (nephew of Increase Mather ), Rev. James Noyes II (son of James Noyes ), James Pierpont , Abraham Pierson , Noadiah Russell , Joseph Webb, and Timothy Woodbridge , all Harvard alumni , met in the study of Reverend Samuel Russell , in Branford , to donate books to form the school's library. The group, led by James Pierpont , is now known as \"The Founders\". \n\nKnown from its origin as the \"Collegiate School\", the institution opened in the home of its first rector , Abraham Pierson, who is considered Yale's first president. Pierson lived in Killingworth . The school moved to Saybrook in 1703, when the first treasurer of Yale, Nathaniel Lynde, donated land and a building. In 1716, it moved to New Haven.\n\nMeanwhile, there was a rift forming at Harvard between its sixth president, Increase Mather, and the rest of the Harvard clergy, whom Mather viewed as increasingly liberal, ecclesiastically lax, and overly broad in Church polity . The feud caused the Mathers to champion the Collegiate School in the hope it would maintain the Puritan religious orthodoxy in a way Harvard had not. Rev. Jason Haven , minister at the First Church and Parish in Dedham , Massachusetts, had been considered for the presidency on account of his orthodox theology and \"Neatness dignity and purity of Style [which] surpass those of all that have been mentioned\", but was passed over due to his \"very Valetudinary and infirm State of Health\". \n\nIn 1718, at the behest of either Rector Samuel Andrew or the colony's Governor Gurdon Saltonstall , Cotton Mather contacted the Boston-born businessman Elihu Yale to ask for money to construct a new building for the college. Through the persuasion of Jeremiah Dummer , Yale, who had made a fortune in Madras while working for the East India Company as the first president of Fort St. George , donated nine bales of goods, which were sold for more than £560, a substantial sum of money. Cotton Mather suggested the school change its name to \"Yale College\". The name Yale is the Anglicized spelling of the Welsh name Iâl , which had been used for the family estate at Plas yn Iâl, near Llandegla , Wales.\n\nMeanwhile, a Harvard graduate working in England convinced 180 prominent intellectuals to donate books to Yale. The 1714 shipment of 500 books represented the best of modern English literature, science, philosophy and theology. It had a profound effect on intellectuals at Yale. Undergraduate Jonathan Edwards discovered John Locke 's works and developed his \" new divinity \". In 1722 the rector and six friends, who had a study group to discuss the new ideas, announced they had given up Calvinism , become Arminians , and joined the Church of England . They were ordained in England and returned to the colonies as missionaries for the Anglican faith. Thomas Clapp became president in 1745, and while he attempted to return the college to Calvinist orthodoxy, did not close the library. Other students found Deist books in the library. \n\nYale College undergraduates follow a liberal arts curriculum with departmental majors and is organized into a social system of residential colleges .\n\nYale was swept up by the great intellectual movements of the period—the Great Awakening and Enlightenment —due to the religious and scientific interests of presidents Thomas Clap and Ezra Stiles . They were instrumental in developing the scientific curriculum while dealing with wars, student tumults, graffiti, \"irrelevance\" of curricula, desperate need for endowment and disagreements with the Connecticut legislature . [ page needed ]\n\nSerious American students of theology and divinity, particularly in New England, regarded Hebrew as a classical language , along with Greek and Latin , and essential for study of the Old Testament in the original. Reverend Stiles, president from 1778 to 1795, brought with him his interest in Hebrew as a vehicle for studying ancient Biblical texts in their original language, requiring all freshmen to study Hebrew (in contrast to Harvard, where only upperclassmen were required to study it) and is responsible for the Hebrew phrase אורים ותמים ( Urim and Thummim ) on the Yale seal. A 1746 graduate of Yale, Stiles came to the college with experience in education, having played an integral role in founding Brown University . Stiles' greatest challenge occurred in 1779 when British forces occupied New Haven and threatened to raze the college. However, Yale graduate Edmund Fanning , secretary to the British general in command of the occupation, intervened and the college was saved. In 1803, Fanning was granted an honorary degree LL.D. . \n\nAs the only college in Connecticut from 1701 to 1823, Yale educated the sons of the elite. Punishable offenses included cardplaying , tavern-going, destruction of college property, and acts of disobedience. Harvard was distinctive for the stability and maturity of its tutor corps, while Yale had youth and zeal. \n\nThe emphasis on classics gave rise to private student societies, open only by invitation, which arose as forums for discussions of scholarship, literature and politics. The first were debating societies: Crotonia in 1738, Linonia in 1753 and Brothers in Unity in 1768. Linonia and Brothers in Unity continue to exist; commemorations to them can be found with names given to campus structures, like Brothers in Unity Courtyard in Branford College.\n\nThe Yale Report of 1828 was a dogmatic defense of the Latin and Greek curriculum against critics who wanted more courses in modern languages, math and science. Unlike higher education in Europe , there was no national curriculum for U.S. colleges and universities. In the competition for students and financial support, college leaders strove to keep current with demands for innovation. At the same time, they realized a significant portion of students and prospective students demanded a classical background. The report meant the classics would not be abandoned. During this period, institutions experimented with changes in the curriculum, often resulting in a dual-track curriculum. In the decentralized environment of U.S. higher education, balancing change with tradition was a common challenge. A group of professors at Yale and New Haven Congregationalist ministers articulated a conservative response to the changes brought by Victorian culture . They concentrated on developing a person possessed of religious values strong enough to sufficiently resist temptations from within, yet flexible enough to adjust to the ' isms ' ( professionalism , materialism , individualism , and consumerism ) tempting them from without. [ page needed ] William Graham Sumner , professor from 1872 to 1909, taught in the emerging disciplines of economics and sociology to overflowing classrooms. Sumner bested President Noah Porter , who disliked the social sciences and wanted Yale to lock into its traditions of classical education. Porter objected to Sumner's use of a textbook by Herbert Spencer that espoused agnostic materialism because it might harm students. \n\nUntil 1887, the legal name of the university was \"The President and Fellows of Yale College, in New Haven\". In 1887, under an act passed by the Connecticut General Assembly , Yale was renamed \"Yale University\". \n\nThe Revolutionary War soldier Nathan Hale (Yale 1773) was the archetype of the Yale ideal in the early 19th century: a manly yet aristocratic scholar, well-versed in knowledge and sports, and a patriot who \"regretted\" that he \"had but one life to lose\" for his country. Western painter Frederic Remington (Yale 1900) was an artist whose heroes gloried in the combat and tests of strength in the Wild West. The fictional, turn-of-the-20th-century Yale man Frank Merriwell embodied this same heroic ideal without racial prejudice, and his fictional successor Dink Stover in the novel Stover at Yale (1912) questioned the business mentality that had become prevalent at the school. Increasingly students turned to athletic stars as their heroes, especially since winning the big game became the goal of the student body, the alumni, and the team itself. \n\nAlong with Harvard and Princeton , Yale students rejected British concepts about ' amateurism ' and constructed athletic programs that were uniquely American. The Harvard–Yale football rivalry began in 1875. Between 1892, when Harvard and Yale met in one of the first intercollegiate debates , and in 1909 (year of the first Triangular Debate of Harvard/Yale/Princeton) the rhetoric, symbolism, and metaphors used in athletics were used to frame these debates. Debates were covered on front pages of college newspapers and emphasized in yearbooks , and team members received the equivalent of athletic letters for their jackets. There were rallies to send off teams to matches, but they never attained the broad appeal athletics enjoyed. One reason may be that debates do not have a clear winner, because scoring is subjective. With late 19th-century concerns about the impact of modern life on the body, athletics offered hope that neither the individual nor society was coming apart. \n\nIn 1909–10, football faced a crisis resulting from the failure of the reforms of 1905–06, which sought to solve the problem of serious injuries. There was a mood of alarm and mistrust, and, while the crisis was developing, the presidents of Harvard, Yale, and Princeton developed a project to reform the sport and forestall possible radical changes forced by government. Presidents Arthur Hadley of Yale, A. Lawrence Lowell of Harvard, and Woodrow Wilson of Princeton worked to develop moderate reforms to reduce injuries. Their attempts, however, were reduced by rebellion against the rules committee and formation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association . While the big three had attempted to operate independently of the majority, the changes pushed did reduce injuries. \n\nStarting with the addition of the Yale School of Medicine in 1810, the college expanded gradually, establishing the Yale Divinity School in 1822, Yale Law School in 1822, the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences in 1847, the now-defunct Sheffield Scientific School in 1847, [ a ] and the Yale School of Fine Arts in 1869. In 1887, under the presidency of Timothy Dwight V , Yale College was renamed to Yale University, and the former name was applied only to the undergraduate college . The university would continue to expand into the 20th and 21st centuries, adding the Yale School of Music in 1894, the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies in 1900, the Yale School of Public Health in 1915, the Yale School of Architecture in 1916, the Yale School of Nursing 1923, the Yale School of Drama in 1955, the Yale School of Management in 1976, and the Jackson School of Global Affairs in 2022. The Sheffield Scientific School would also reorganize its relationship with the university to teach only undergraduate courses.\n\nExpansion caused controversy about Yale's new roles. Noah Porter , a moral philosopher, was president from 1871 to 1886. During an age of expansion in higher education, Porter resisted the rise of the new research university, claiming an eager embrace of its ideals would corrupt undergraduate education. Historian George Levesque argues Porter was not a simple-minded reactionary, uncritically committed to tradition, but a principled and selective conservative. [ page needed ] Levesque says he did not endorse everything old or reject everything new; rather, he sought to apply long-established ethical and pedagogical principles to a changing culture. Levesque concludes, noting he may have misunderstood some of the challenges, but he correctly anticipated the enduring tensions that have accompanied the emergence of the modern university.\n\nMilton Winternitz led the Yale School of Medicine as its dean from 1920 to 1935. Dedicated to the new scientific medicine established in Germany, he was equally fervent about \"social medicine\" and the study of humans in their environment. He established the \"Yale System\" of teaching, with few lectures and fewer exams, and strengthened the full-time faculty system; he created the graduate-level Yale School of Nursing and the psychiatry department and built new buildings. Progress toward his plans for an Institute of Human Relations, envisioned as a refuge where social scientists would collaborate with biological scientists in a holistic study of humankind, lasted only a few years before resentful antisemitic colleagues drove him to resign. \n\nBefore World War II , most elite university faculties counted among their numbers few, if any, Jews, blacks, women, or other minorities; Yale was no exception. By 1980, this condition had been altered dramatically, as numerous members of those groups held faculty positions. Almost all members of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences—and some members of other faculties—teach undergraduate courses, more than 2,000 of which are offered annually. \n\nIn 1793, Lucinda Foote passed the entrance exams for Yale College, but was rejected by the president on the basis of her gender. Women studied at Yale from 1892, in graduate-level programs at the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences . The first seven women to earn PhDs received their degrees in 1894: Elizabeth Deering Hanscom , Cornelia H. B. Rogers, Sara Bulkley Rogers, Margaretta Palmer , Mary Augusta Scott , Laura Johnson Wylie, and Charlotte Fitch Roberts . There is a portrait of them in Sterling Memorial Library , painted by Brenda Zlamany . \n\nIn 1966, Yale began discussions with its sister school Vassar College about merging to foster coeducation at the undergraduate level. Vassar, then all-female and part of the Seven Sisters —elite higher education schools that served as sister institutions to the Ivy League when nearly all Ivy League institutions still only admitted men—tentatively accepted, but then declined the invitation. Both schools introduced coeducation independently in 1969. Amy Solomon was the first woman to register as a Yale undergraduate; she was the first woman at Yale to join an undergraduate society, St. Anthony Hall . The undergraduate class of 1973 was the first to have women starting from freshman year; all undergraduate women were housed in Vanderbilt Hall. \n\nA decade into co-education, student assault and harassment by faculty became the impetus for the trailblazing lawsuit Alexander v. Yale . In the 1970s, a group of students and a faculty member sued Yale for its failure to curtail sexual harassment, especially by male faculty. The case was partly built from a 1977 report authored by plaintiff Ann Olivarius , \"A report to the Yale Corporation from the Yale Undergraduate Women's Caucus\". This case was the first to use Title IX to argue and establish that sexual harassment of female students can be considered illegal sex discrimination. The plaintiffs were Olivarius, Ronni Alexander, Margery Reifler, Pamela Price, and Lisa E. Stone. They were joined by Yale classics professor John \"Jack\" J. Winkler. The lawsuit, brought partly by Catharine MacKinnon , alleged rape, fondling, and offers of higher grades for sex by faculty, including Keith Brion , professor of flute and director of bands, political science professor Raymond Duvall, English professor Michael Cooke , and coach of the field hockey team, Richard Kentwell. While unsuccessful in the courts, the legal reasoning changed the landscape of sex discrimination law and resulted in the establishment of Yale's Grievance Board and Women's Center. In 2011 a Title IX complaint was filed against Yale by students and graduates, including editors of Yale's feminist magazine Broad Recognition , alleging the university had a hostile sexual climate. In response, the university formed a Title IX steering committee to address complaints of sexual misconduct. Afterwards, universities and colleges throughout the U.S. also established sexual harassment grievance procedures.\n\nYale instituted policies in the early 20th century designed to maintain the proportion of white Protestants from notable families in the student body (see numerus clausus ) and eliminated such preferences, beginning with the class of 1970. \n\nIn 2006, Yale and Peking University (PKU) established a Joint Undergraduate Program in Beijing, an exchange program allowing Yale students to spend a semester living and studying with PKU honor students. In July 2012, the Yale University-PKU Program ended due to weak participation. \n\nIn 2007 outgoing Yale President Rick Levin characterized Yale's institutional priorities: \"First, among the nation's finest research universities, Yale is distinctively committed to excellence in undergraduate education. Second, in our graduate and professional schools, as well as in Yale College, we are committed to the education of leaders.\" \n\nIn 2009, former British Prime Minister Tony Blair picked Yale as one location—the others being Britain's Durham University and Universiti Teknologi Mara —for the Tony Blair Faith Foundation 's United States Faith and Globalization Initiative. As of 2009, former Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo is the director of the Yale Center for the Study of Globalization and teaches an undergraduate seminar, \"Debating Globalization\". As of 2009, former presidential candidate and DNC chair Howard Dean teaches a residential college seminar, \"Understanding Politics and Politicians\". Also in 2009, an alliance was formed among Yale, University College London , and both schools' affiliated hospital complexes to conduct research focused on the direct improvement of patient care—a field known as translational medicine . President Richard Levin noted that Yale has hundreds of other partnerships across the world, but \"no existing collaboration matches the scale of the new partnership with UCL\". In August 2013, a new partnership with the National University of Singapore led to the opening of Yale-NUS College in Singapore, a joint effort to create a new liberal arts college in Asia featuring a curriculum including Western and Asian traditions. \n\nIn 2017, having been suggested for decades, Yale University renamed Calhoun College, named for slave owner , anti-abolitionist , and white supremacist Vice President John C. Calhoun . It is now Hopper College, after Grace Hopper . \n\nIn 2020, in the wake of the George Floyd protests , the #CancelYale tag was used on social media to demand that Elihu Yale's name be removed from Yale University. Much of the support originated from right-wing pundits such as Mike Cernovich and Ann Coulter , who intended to satirize what they perceived as the excesses of cancel culture . Yale spent most of his professional career in the employ of the East India Company (EIC), serving as the governor of the Presidency of Fort St. George in modern-day Chennai . The EIC, including Yale himself, was involved in the Indian Ocean slave trade , though the extent of Yale's involvement in slavery remains debated. His singularly large donation led critics to argue Yale University relied on money derived from slavery for its first scholarships and endowments. \n\nIn 2020, the U.S. Justice Department sued Yale for alleged discrimination against Asian and white candidates, through affirmative action admission policies. In 2021, under the new Biden administration, the Justice Department withdrew the lawsuit. The group, Students for Fair Admissions , later won a similar lawsuit against Harvard . \n\nIn April 2024, Yale students joined other campuses across the United States in protests against the Gaza war . The student protestors demanded that Yale University divest from military weapons companies with ties to Israel 's war on Gaza. Over 50 people were arrested at protests in and around Beinecke Plaza , and protests continued during the summer and in the new academic year starting September 2024. Undergraduate students \"overwhelmingly\" voted in a December referendum to call for divestment. \n\nThe Boston Globe wrote in 2002 that \"if there's one school that can lay claim to educating the nation's top national leaders over the past three decades, it's Yale\". Yale alumni were represented on the Democratic or Republican ticket in every U.S. presidential election between 1972 and 2004. Yale-educated presidents since the end of the Vietnam War include Gerald Ford , George H. W. Bush , Bill Clinton , and George W. Bush , and major-party nominees include Hillary Clinton (2016), John Kerry (2004), Joseph Lieberman (vice president, 2000), and Sargent Shriver (vice president, 1972). Other alumni who have made serious bids for the presidency include Amy Klobuchar (2020), Tom Steyer (2020), Ben Carson (2016), Howard Dean (2004), Gary Hart (1984 and 1988), Paul Tsongas (1992), Pat Robertson (1988) and Jerry Brown (1976, 1980, 1992).\n\nSeveral explanations have been offered for Yale's representation since the end of the Vietnam War. Sources note the spirit of campus activism that has existed at Yale since the 1960s, and the intellectual influence of Reverend William Sloane Coffin on future candidates. Yale President Levin attributes the run to Yale's focus on creating \"a laboratory for future leaders\", an institutional priority that began during the tenure of Yale Presidents Alfred Whitney Griswold and Kingman Brewster . Richard H. Brodhead , former dean of Yale College and now president of Duke University , stated: \"We do give very significant attention to orientation to the community in our admissions, and there is a very strong tradition of volunteerism at Yale\". Yale historian Gaddis Smith notes \"an ethos of organized activity\" at Yale during the 20th century that led Kerry to lead the Yale Political Union 's Liberal Party, George Pataki the Conservative Party, and Lieberman to manage the Yale Daily News . Camille Paglia points to a history of networking and elitism: \"It has to do with a web of friendships and affiliations built up in school\". CNN suggests that George W. Bush benefited from preferential admissions policies for the \"son and grandson of alumni\", and for a \"member of a politically influential family\". Elisabeth Bumiller and James Fallows credit the culture of community that exists between students, faculty, and administration, which downplays self-interest and reinforces commitment to others. \n\nDuring the 1988 presidential election, George H. W. Bush (Yale '48) derided Michael Dukakis for having \"foreign-policy views born in Harvard Yard's boutique\". When challenged on the distinction between Dukakis's Harvard connection and his Yale background, he said that, unlike Harvard, Yale's reputation was \"so diffuse, there isn't a symbol, I don't think, in the Yale situation, any symbolism in it\" and said Yale did not share Harvard's reputation for \"liberalism and elitism\". In 2004 Howard Dean stated, \"In some ways, I consider myself separate from the other three (Yale) candidates of 2004. Yale changed so much between the class of '68 and the class of '71. My class was the first class to have women in it; it was the first class to have a significant effort to recruit African Americans. It was an extraordinary time, and in that span of time is the change of an entire generation\". \n\nThe President and Fellows of Yale College , also known as the Yale Corporation, or board of trustees, is the governing body of the university and consists of thirteen standing committees with separate responsibilities outlined in the by-laws. The corporation has 19 members: three ex officio members, ten successor trustees, and six elected alumni fellows. The university has three major academic components: Yale College (the undergraduate program), the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, and the twelve professional schools. \n\nYale's former president Richard C. Levin was, at the time, one of the highest paid university presidents in the United States with a 2008 salary of $1.5 million . Yale's succeeding president Peter Salovey ranks 40th with a 2020 salary of $1.16 million . \n\nThe Yale Provost's Office and similar executive positions have launched several women into prominent university executive positions. In 1977, Provost Hanna Holborn Gray was appointed interim president of Yale and later went on to become president of the University of Chicago, being the first woman to hold either position at each respective school. In 1994, Provost Judith Rodin became the first permanent female president of an Ivy League institution at the University of Pennsylvania . In 2002, Provost Alison Richard became the vice-chancellor of the University of Cambridge . In 2003, the dean of the Divinity School, Rebecca Chopp , was appointed president of Colgate University and later went on to serve as the president of Swarthmore College in 2009, and then the first female chancellor of the University of Denver in 2014. In 2004, Provost Dr. Susan Hockfield became the president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . In 2004, Dean of the Nursing school, Catherine Gilliss, was appointed the dean of Duke University's School of Nursing and vice chancellor for nursing affairs. In 2007, Deputy Provost H. Kim Bottomly was named president of Wellesley College . \n\nSimilar examples for men who have served in Yale leadership positions can also be found. In 2004, Dean of Yale College Richard H. Brodhead was appointed as the president of Duke University . In 2008, Provost Andrew Hamilton was confirmed to be the vice chancellor of the University of Oxford. \n\nYale University staff are represented by several different unions. Clerical and technical workers are represented by Local 34, and service and maintenance workers are represented by Local 35, both of the same union affiliate UNITE HERE . Unlike similar institutions, Yale has consistently refused to recognize its graduate student union, Local 33 (another affiliate of UNITE HERE), citing claims that the union's elections were undemocratic and how graduate students are not employees; the move to not recognize the union has been criticized by the American Federation of Teachers . In addition, officers of the Yale University Police Department are represented by the Yale Police Benevolent Association, which affiliated in 2005 with the Connecticut Organization for Public Safety Employees. Yale security officers joined the International Union of Security, Police and Fire Professionals of America in late 2010, even though the Yale administration contested the election. In October 2014, after deliberation, Yale security decided to form a new union, the Yale University Security Officers Association, which has since represented the campus security officers. \n\nYale has a history of difficult and prolonged labor negotiations, often culminating in strikes. [ page needed ] There have been at least eight strikes since 1968, and The New York Times wrote that Yale has a reputation as having the worst record of labor tension of any university in the U.S. Moreover, Yale has been accused by the AFL–CIO of failing to treat workers with respect, as well as not renewing contracts with professors over involvement in campus labor issues. Yale has responded to strikes with claims over mediocre union participation and the benefits of their contracts. \n\nYale's central campus in downtown New Haven covers 260 acres (1.1 km 2 ) and comprises its main, historic campus and a medical campus adjacent to the Yale–New Haven Hospital . In western New Haven, the university holds 500 acres (2.0 km 2 ) of athletic facilities, including the Yale Golf Course . In 2008, Yale purchased the 17-building, 136-acre (0.55 km 2 ) former Bayer HealthCare complex in West Haven , Connecticut, the buildings of which are now used as laboratory and research space. Yale also owns seven forests in Connecticut, Vermont, and New Hampshire—the largest of which is the 7,840-acre (31.7 km 2 ) Yale-Myers Forest in Connecticut's Quiet Corner —and nature preserves including Horse Island . \n\nYale is noted for its largely Collegiate Gothic campus as well as several iconic modern buildings commonly discussed in architectural history survey courses: Louis Kahn 's Yale Art Gallery and Center for British Art, Eero Saarinen 's Ingalls Rink and Ezra Stiles and Morse Colleges, and Paul Rudolph's Art & Architecture Building . Yale also owns and has restored many noteworthy 19th-century mansions along Hillhouse Avenue , which was considered the most beautiful street in America by Charles Dickens when he visited the United States in the 1840s. In 2011, Travel + Leisure listed the Yale campus as one of the most beautiful in the United States. \n\nMany of Yale's buildings were constructed in the Collegiate Gothic architecture style from 1917 to 1931, financed largely by Edward S. Harkness , including the Yale Drama School . Stone sculpture built into the walls of the buildings portray contemporary college personalities, such as a writer, an athlete, a tea-drinking socialite, and a student who has fallen asleep while reading. Similarly, the decorative friezes on the buildings depict contemporary scenes, like a policemen chasing a robber and arresting a prostitute (on the wall of the Law School), or a student relaxing with a mug of beer and a cigarette. The architect, James Gamble Rogers , faux-aged these buildings by splashing the walls with acid, deliberately breaking their leaded glass windows and repairing them in the style of the Middle Ages , and creating niches for decorative statuary but leaving them empty to simulate loss or theft over the ages. In fact, the buildings merely simulate Middle Ages architecture, for though they appear to be constructed of solid stone blocks in the authentic manner, most actually have steel framing as was commonly used in 1930. One exception is Harkness Tower , 216 feet (66 m) tall, which was originally a free-standing stone structure. It was reinforced in 1964 to allow the installation of the Yale Memorial Carillon .\n\nOther examples of the Gothic style are on the Old Campus by architects like Henry Austin , Charles C. Haight and Russell Sturgis . Several are associated with members of the Vanderbilt family , including Vanderbilt Hall, Phelps Hall, St. Anthony Hall (a commission for member Frederick William Vanderbilt ), the Mason, Sloane and Osborn laboratories, dormitories for the Sheffield Scientific School (the engineering and sciences school at Yale until 1956) and elements of Silliman College , the largest residential college. \n\nThe oldest building on campus, Connecticut Hall (built in 1750), is in the Georgian style . Georgian-style buildings erected from 1929 to 1933 include Timothy Dwight College , Pierson College , and Davenport College , except the latter's east, York Street façade, which was constructed in the Gothic style to coordinate with adjacent structures.\n\nThe Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library , designed by Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill , is one of the largest buildings in the world reserved exclusively for the preservation of rare books and manuscripts. The library includes a six-story above-ground tower of book stacks, filled with 180,000 volumes, that is surrounded by large translucent Vermont marble panels and a steel and granite truss. The panels act as windows and subdue direct sunlight while also diffusing the light in warm hues throughout the interior. Near the library is a sunken courtyard with sculptures by Isamu Noguchi that are said to represent time (the pyramid), the sun (the circle), and chance (the cube). The library is located near the center of the university in Hewitt Quadrangle , which is now more commonly referred to as \" Beinecke Plaza \".\n\nAlumnus Eero Saarinen , Finnish-American architect of such notable structures as the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Washington Dulles International Airport main terminal, Bell Labs Holmdel Complex and the CBS Building in Manhattan, designed Ingalls Rink , dedicated in 1959, as well as the residential colleges Ezra Stiles and Morse. These latter were modeled after the medieval Italian hill town of San Gimignano —a prototype chosen for the town's pedestrian-friendly milieu and fortress-like stone towers. These tower forms at Yale act in counterpoint to the college's many Gothic spires and Georgian cupolas. \n\nThe athletic field complex is partially in New Haven, and partially in West Haven . \n\nNotable nonresidential campus buildings and landmarks include Battell Chapel , Beinecke Rare Book Library , Harkness Tower , Humanities Quadrangle , Ingalls Rink , Kline Biology Tower, Osborne Memorial Laboratories , Payne Whitney Gymnasium , Peabody Museum of Natural History , Sterling Hall of Medicine, Sterling Law Buildings , Sterling Memorial Library , Woolsey Hall , Yale Center for British Art , Yale University Art Gallery , Yale Art & Architecture Building , and the Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art in London.\n\nYale's secret society buildings (some of which are called \"tombs\") were built to be private yet unmistakable. A diversity of architectural styles is represented: Berzelius , Donn Barber in an austere cube with classical detailing (erected in 1908 or 1910); Book and Snake , Louis R. Metcalfe in a Greek Ionic style (erected in 1901); Elihu , architect unknown but built in a Colonial style (constructed on an early 17th-century foundation although the building is from the 18th century); Mace and Chain , in a late colonial, early Victorian style (built in 1823). (Interior moulding is said to have belonged to Benedict Arnold ); Manuscript Society , King-lui Wu with Dan Kiley responsible for landscaping and Josef Albers for the brickwork intaglio mural. Building constructed in a mid-century modern style; Scroll and Key , Richard Morris Hunt in a Moorish- or Islamic-inspired Beaux-Arts style (erected 1869–70); Skull and Bones , possibly Alexander Jackson Davis or Henry Austin in an Egypto-Doric style utilizing Brownstone (in 1856 the first wing was completed, in 1903 the second wing, 1911 the Neo-Gothic towers in rear garden were completed); St. Elmo , (former tomb) Kenneth M. Murchison , 1912, designs inspired by Elizabethan manor. Current location, brick colonial; and Wolf's Head , Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue , erected 1923–1924, Collegiate Gothic.\n\nYale's Office of Sustainability develops and implements sustainability practices at Yale. Yale is committed to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions 10% below 1990 levels by 2020. As part of this commitment, the university allocates renewable energy credits to offset some of the energy used by residential colleges. Eleven campus buildings are candidates for LEED design and certification. Yale Sustainable Food Project initiated the introduction of local, organic vegetables, fruits, and beef to all residential college dining halls. Yale was listed as a Campus Sustainability Leader on the Sustainable Endowments Institute's College Sustainability Report Card 2008, and received a \"B+\" grade overall. Yale is a member of the Ivy Plus Sustainability Consortium, through which it has committed to best-practice sharing and the ongoing exchange of campus sustainability solutions along with other member institutions. \n\nYale is the largest taxpayer and employer in the City of New Haven , and has often buoyed the city's economy and communities. Yale, however, has consistently opposed paying a tax on its academic property. Yale's Art Galleries , along with many other university resources, are free and openly accessible. Yale also funds the New Haven Promise program, paying full tuition for eligible students from New Haven public schools. \n\nYale has a complicated relationship with its home city; for example, thousands of students volunteer every year in myriad community organizations, but city officials, who decry Yale's exemption from local property taxes, have long pressed the university to do more to help. Under President Levin, Yale has financially supported many of New Haven's efforts to reinvigorate the city. Evidence suggests that the town and gown relationships are mutually beneficial. Still, the economic power of the university increased dramatically with its financial success amid a decline in the local economy. \n\nSeveral campus safety strategies have been pioneered at Yale. The first campus police force was founded at Yale in 1894, when the university contracted city police officers to exclusively cover the campus. Later hired by the university, the officers were originally brought in to quell unrest between students and city residents and curb destructive student behavior. In addition to the Yale Police Department, a variety of safety services are available including blue phones, a safety escort , and 24-hour shuttle service.\n\nIn the 1970s and 1980s, poverty and violent crime rose in New Haven, dampening Yale's student and faculty recruiting efforts. Between 1990 and 2006, New Haven's crime rate fell by half, helped by a community policing strategy by the New Haven Police and Yale's campus became the safest among peer schools. \n\nIn 2004, the national non-profit watchdog group Security on Campus filed a complaint with the U.S. Department of Education , accusing Yale of under-reporting rape and sexual assaults. \n\nIn April 2021, Yale announced that it will require students to receive a COVID-19 vaccine as a condition of being on campus during the fall 2021 term. \n\nUndergraduate admission to Yale College is considered \"most selective\" by U.S. News . In 2022, Yale accepted 2,234 students to the Class of 2026 out of 50,015 applicants, for an acceptance rate of 4.46%. 98% of students graduate within six years. \n\nThrough its program of need-based financial aid, Yale commits to meet the full demonstrated financial need of all applicants, and the university is need-blind for both domestic and international applicants. Most financial aid is in the form of grants and scholarships that do not need to be paid back to the university, and the average need-based aid grant for the Class of 2017 was $46,395 . 15% of Yale College students are expected to have no parental contribution, and about 50% receive some form of financial aid. About 16% of the Class of 2013 had some form of student loan debt at graduation, with an average debt of $13,000 among borrowers. For 2019, Yale ranked second in enrollment of recipients of the National Merit $2,500 Scholarship (140 scholars). \n\nHalf of all Yale undergraduates are women, more than 39% are ethnic minority U.S. citizens (19% are underrepresented minorities), and 10.5% are international students . 55% attended public schools and 45% attended private, religious, or international schools, and 97% of students were in the top 10% of their high school class. Every year, Yale College also admits a small group of non-traditional students through the Eli Whitney Students Program.\n\nYale University Library , which holds over 15 million volumes, is the second-largest university collection in the United States. The main library, Sterling Memorial Library , contains about 4 million volumes, and other holdings are dispersed at subject and location libraries.\n\nRare books are found in several Yale collections. The Beinecke Rare Book Library has a large collection of rare books and manuscripts. The Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library includes important historical medical texts, including an impressive collection of rare books, as well as historical medical instruments. The Lewis Walpole Library contains the largest collection of 18th‑century British literary works. The Elizabethan Club , technically a private organization, makes its Elizabethan folios and first editions available to qualified researchers through Yale.\n\nYale's museum collections are also of international stature. The Yale University Art Gallery , the country's first university-affiliated art museum, contains more than 200,000 works, including Old Masters and important collections of modern art, in the Swartwout and Kahn buildings. The latter, Louis Kahn 's first large-scale American work (1953), was renovated and reopened in December 2006. The Yale Center for British Art , the largest collection of British art outside of the UK, grew from a gift of Paul Mellon and is housed in another Kahn-designed building.\n\nThe Peabody Museum of Natural History in New Haven is used by school children and contains research collections in anthropology, archaeology, and the natural environment.\n\nThe Yale University Collection of Musical Instruments , affiliated with the Yale School of Music, is perhaps the least-known of Yale's collections because its hours of opening are restricted.\n\nThe museums once housed the artifacts brought to the United States from Peru by Yale history professor Hiram Bingham in his Yale-financed expedition to Machu Picchu in 1912—when the removal of such artifacts was legal. The artifacts were restored to Peru in 2012. \n\nThe U.S. News & World Report ranked Yale third among U.S. national universities for 2016, as it had for each of the previous sixteen years. Yale University is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education . \n\nInternationally, Yale was ranked 11th in the 2016 Academic Ranking of World Universities , tenth in the 2016–17 Nature Index for quality of scientific research output, and tenth in the 2016 CWUR World University Rankings. The university was also ranked sixth in the 2016 Times Higher Education (THE) Global University Employability Rankings and eighth in the Academic World Reputation Rankings. In 2019, it ranked 27th among the universities around the world by SCImago Institutions Rankings . \n\nYale is a member of the Association of American Universities (AAU) and is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities—Very high research activity\". The National Science Foundation ranked Yale 15th among American universities for research and development expenditures in 2021 with $1.16 billion . \n\nYale's current faculty include 67 members of the National Academy of Sciences , 55 members of the National Academy of Medicine , 8 members of the National Academy of Engineering , and 187 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . The college is, after normalization for institution size, the tenth-largest baccalaureate source of doctoral degree recipients in the United States, and the largest such source within the Ivy League. It also is a top 10 (ranked seventh) baccalaureate source (after normalization for the number of graduates) of some of the most notable scientists ( Nobel , Fields , Turing prizes, or membership in National Academy of Sciences , National Academy of Engineering , or National Academy of Medicine ). \n\nYale's English and Comparative Literature departments were part of the New Criticism movement. Of the New Critics, Robert Penn Warren , W.K. Wimsatt , and Cleanth Brooks were all Yale faculty. Later, the Yale Comparative literature department became a center of American deconstruction . Jacques Derrida , the father of deconstruction, taught at the department of comparative literature from the late 1970s to mid-1980s. Several other Yale faculty members were also associated with deconstruction, forming the so-called \" Yale School \". These included Paul de Man who taught in the Departments of Comparative Literature and French, J. Hillis Miller , Geoffrey Hartman (both taught in the Departments of English and Comparative Literature), and Harold Bloom (English), whose theoretical position was always somewhat specific, and who ultimately took a very different path from the rest of this group. Yale's history department has also originated important intellectual trends. Historians C. Vann Woodward and David Brion Davis are credited with beginning in the 1960s and 1970s an important stream of southern historians; likewise, David Montgomery , a labor historian, advised many of the current generation of labor historians in the country. Yale's Music School and department fostered the growth of Music Theory in the latter half of the 20th century. The Journal of Music Theory was founded there in 1957; Allen Forte and David Lewin were influential teachers and scholars.\n\nSince the late 1960s, Yale produces social sciences and policy research through its Yale Institution for Social and Policy Studies (ISPS).\n\nIn addition to eminent faculty members, Yale research relies heavily on the presence of roughly 1200 Postdocs from various national and international origin working in the multiple laboratories in the sciences, social sciences, humanities, and professional schools of the university. The university progressively recognized this working force with the recent creation of the Office for Postdoctoral Affairs and the Yale Postdoctoral Association .\n\nYale is a research university, with the majority of its students in the graduate and professional schools. Undergraduates , or Yale College students, come from a variety of ethnic, national, socioeconomic, and personal backgrounds. Of the 2010–2011 freshman class, 10% are non‑U.S. citizens, while 54% went to public high schools. The median family income of Yale students is $192,600 , with 57% of students coming from the top 10% highest-earning families and 16% from the bottom 60%. \n\nYale's residential college system was established in 1933 by Edward S. Harkness , who admired the social intimacy of Oxford and Cambridge and donated significant funds to found similar colleges at Yale and Harvard. Though Yale's colleges resemble their English precursors organizationally and architecturally, they are dependent entities of Yale College and have limited autonomy. The colleges are led by a head and an academic dean, who reside in the college, and university faculty and affiliates constitute each college's fellowship. Colleges offer their own seminars, social events, and speaking engagements known as \"Master's Teas\", but do not contain programs of study or academic departments. All other undergraduate courses are taught by the Faculty of Arts and Sciences and are open to members of any college.\n\nAll undergraduates are members of a college, to which they are assigned before their freshman year, and 85 percent live in the college quadrangle or a college-affiliated dormitory. While the majority of upperclassman live in the colleges, most on-campus freshmen live on the Old Campus , the university's oldest precinct.\n\nWhile Harkness' original colleges were Georgian Revival or Collegiate Gothic in style, two colleges constructed in the 1960s, Morse and Ezra Stiles Colleges, have modernist designs. All twelve college quadrangles are organized around a courtyard, and each has a dining hall, courtyard, library, common room, and a range of student facilities. The twelve colleges are named for important alumni or significant places in university history. In 2017, the university opened two new colleges near Science Hill . \n\nSince the 1960s, John C. Calhoun 's white supremacist beliefs and pro-slavery leadership had prompted calls to rename the college or remove its tributes to Calhoun. The racially motivated church shooting in Charleston , South Carolina, led to renewed calls in the summer of 2015 for Calhoun College , one of 12 residential colleges at the time, to be renamed. In July 2015 students signed a petition calling for the name change. They argued in the petition that—while Calhoun was respected in the 19th century as an \"extraordinary American statesman\"—he was \"one of the most prolific defenders of slavery and white supremacy\" in the history of the United States. In August 2015, Yale President Peter Salovey addressed the Freshman Class of 2019 in which he responded to the racial tensions but explained why the college would not be renamed. He described Calhoun as \"a notable political theorist, a vice president to two different U.S. presidents, a secretary of war and of state, and a congressman and senator representing South Carolina\". He acknowledged that Calhoun also \"believed that the highest forms of civilization depend on involuntary servitude. Not only that, but he also believed that the races he thought to be inferior, black people in particular, ought to be subjected to it for the sake of their own best interests.\" Student activism about this issue increased in the fall of 2015, and included further protests sparked by controversy surrounding an administrator's comments on the potential positive and negative implications of students who wear Halloween costumes that are culturally sensitive . Campus-wide discussions expanded to include critical discussion of the experiences of women of color on campus, and the realities of racism in undergraduate life. The protests were sensationalized by the media and led to the labelling of some students as being members of Generation Snowflake . \n\nIn April 2016, Salovey announced that \"despite decades of vigorous alumni and student protests\", Calhoun's name will remain on the Yale residential college explaining that it is preferable for Yale students to live in Calhoun's \"shadow\" so they will be \"better prepared to rise to the challenges of the present and the future\". He claimed that if they removed Calhoun's name, it would \"obscure\" his \"legacy of slavery rather than addressing it\". \"Yale is part of that history\" and \"We cannot erase American history, but we can confront it, teach it and learn from it.\" One change that will be issued is the title of \"master\" for faculty members who serve as residential college leaders will be renamed to \"head of college\" due to its connotation of slavery. \n\nDespite this apparently conclusive reasoning, Salovey announced that Calhoun College would be renamed for groundbreaking computer scientist Grace Hopper in February 2017. This renaming decision received a range of responses from Yale students and alumni. In his 2019 book Assault on American Excellence , former Dean of Yale Law School Anthony T. Kronman criticized the title and name changes and the lack of support from Salovey for the Christakises , who were targeted by the student activists. Other members of the university community disagreed with Kronman's positions. \n\nIn 2024, Yale had 526 registered undergraduate student organizations, plus hundreds of others for graduate students. \n\nThe university hosts a variety of student journals, magazines, and newspapers. The Yale Literary Magazine , founded in February 1836, is the oldest student literary magazine in the United States. Established in 1872, The Yale Record is the world's oldest college humor magazine . Newspapers include the Yale Daily News , which was first published in 1878, and the weekly Yale Herald , which was first published in 1986. The Yale Journal of Medicine & Law is a biannual magazine that explores the intersection of law and medicine .\n\nDwight Hall, an independent, non-profit community service organization, oversees more than 2,000 Yale undergraduates working on more than 70 community service initiatives in New Haven. The Yale College Council runs several agencies that oversee campus wide activities and student services. The Yale Dramatic Association and Bulldog Productions cater to the theater and film communities, respectively. In addition, the Yale Drama Coalition serves to coordinate between and provide resources for the various Sudler Fund sponsored theater productions which run each weekend. WYBC Yale Radio is the campus's radio station, owned and operated by students. While students used to broadcast on AM and FM frequencies, they now have an Internet-only stream.\n\nThe Yale College Council (YCC) serves as the campus's undergraduate student government. All registered student organizations are regulated and funded by a subsidiary organization of the YCC, known as the Undergraduate Organizations Funding Committee (UOFC). The Graduate and Professional Student Senate (GPSS) serves as Yale's graduate and professional student government.\n\nThe Yale Political Union (YPU) is a debate society founded in 1934 to host student discussions on a wide variety of topics. It is advised by alumni political leaders such as John Kerry and George Pataki .\n\nThe Yale International Relations Association (YIRA) functions as the umbrella organization for the university's top-ranked Model UN team. YIRA also has a Europe-based offshoot, Yale Model Government Europe , other Model UN conferences such as YMUN, YMUN Korea, YMUN Taiwan and Yale Model African Union (YMAU), the Yale Review of International Studies (YRIS), and educational programs such as the Yale International Relations Leadership Institute and Hemispheres.\n\nThe campus includes several fraternities and sororities . The campus features at least 18 a cappella groups, the most famous of which is The Whiffenpoofs , which from its founding in 1909 until 2018 was made up solely of senior men.\n\nThe Elizabethan Club , a social club, has a membership of undergraduates, graduates, faculty and staff with literary or artistic interests. Membership is by invitation. Members and their guests may enter the \"Lizzie's\" premises for conversation and tea. The club owns first editions of a Shakespeare Folio, several Shakespeare Quartos, and a first edition of Milton's Paradise Lost , among other important literary texts.\n\nYale's secret societies include Skull and Bones , Scroll and Key , Wolf's Head , Book and Snake , Elihu , Berzelius , St. Elmo , Manuscript , Brothers in Unity , Linonia , St. Anthony Hall , Shabtai , Myth and Sword , Daughters of Sovereign Government (DSG), Mace and Chain , ISO, Spade and Grave , and Sage and Chalice , among others. The two oldest existing honor societies are the Aurelian (1910) and the Torch Honor Society (1916). \n\nThese are akin to Harvard finals clubs , Princeton eating clubs , and senior societies at University of Pennsylvania .\n\nYale seniors at graduation smash clay pipes underfoot to symbolize passage from their \" bright college years \", though in recent history the pipes have been replaced with \"bubble pipes\". (\"Bright College Years\", the university's alma mater, was penned in 1881 by Henry Durand , Class of 1881, to the tune of Die Wacht am Rhein .) Yale's student tour guides tell visitors that students consider it good luck to rub the toe of the statue of Theodore Dwight Woolsey on Old Campus; however, actual students rarely do so. In the second half of the 20th century Bladderball , a campus-wide game played with a large inflatable ball, became a popular tradition but was banned by administration due to safety concerns. In spite of administration opposition, students revived the game in 2009, 2011, and 2014. \n\nYale supports 35 varsity athletic teams that compete in the Ivy League Conference, the Eastern College Athletic Conference , and the New England Intercollegiate Sailing Association . Yale athletic teams compete intercollegiately at the NCAA Division I level. Like other members of the Ivy League, Yale does not offer athletic scholarships.\n\nYale has numerous athletic facilities, including the Yale Bowl (the nation's first natural \"bowl\" stadium, and prototype for such stadiums as the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum and the Rose Bowl ), located at The Walter Camp Field athletic complex, and the Payne Whitney Gymnasium , the second-largest indoor athletic complex in the world. \n\nIn 1970, the NCAA banned Yale from participating in all NCAA sports for two years, in reaction to Yale—against the wishes of the NCAA—playing its Jewish center Jack Langer in college games after Langer had played for Team United States at the 1969 Maccabiah Games in Israel with the approval of Yale President Kingman Brewster . The decision impacted 300 Yale students, every Yale student on its sports teams, over the next two years. \n\nIn 2016, the men's basketball team won the Ivy League Championship title for the first time in 54 years, earning a spot in the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament . In the first round of the tournament, the Bulldogs beat the Baylor Bears 79–75 in the school's first-ever tournament win. \n\nIn May 2018, the men's lacrosse team defeated the Duke Blue Devils to claim their first-ever NCAA Division I Men's Lacrosse Championship , and were the first Ivy League school to win the title since the Princeton Tigers in 2001. \n\nYale crew is the oldest collegiate athletic team in America, and won Olympic Games Gold Medal for men's eights in 1924 and 1956. The Yale Corinthian Yacht Club , founded in 1881, is the oldest collegiate sailing club in the world. October 21, 2000, marked the dedication of Yale's fourth new boathouse in 157 years of collegiate rowing. The Gilder Boathouse is named to honor former Olympic rower Virginia Gilder '79 and her father Richard Gilder '54, who gave $4 million towards the $7.5 million project. Yale also maintains the Gales Ferry site where the heavyweight men's team trains for the Yale-Harvard Boat Race .\n\nIn 1896, Yale and Johns Hopkins played the first known ice hockey game in the United States. Since 2006, the school's ice hockey clubs have played a commemorative game. \n\nYale students claim to have invented Frisbee , by tossing empty Frisbie Pie Company tins. \n\nYale athletics are supported by the Yale Precision Marching Band . \"Precision\" is used here ironically; the band is a scatter-style band that runs wildly between formations rather than actually marching. The band attends every home football game and many away, as well as most hockey and basketball games throughout the winter.\n\nYale intramural sports are also a significant aspect of student life. Students compete for their respective residential colleges, fostering a friendly rivalry. The year is divided into fall, winter, and spring seasons, each of which includes about 10 different sports. About half the sports are coeducational. At the end of the year, the residential college with the most points (not all sports count equally) wins the Tyng Cup.\n\nNotable among the songs commonly played and sung at events such as commencement , convocation , alumni gatherings, and athletic games is the alma mater, \" Bright College Years \". Despite its popularity, \" Boola Boola \" is not the official fight song , albeit being the origin of the university's unofficial motto. The official Yale fight song, \"Bulldog\" was written by Cole Porter during his undergraduate days and is sung after touchdowns during a football game. Additionally, two other songs, \"Down the Field\" by C.W. O'Conner, and \"Bingo Eli Yale\", also by Cole Porter, are still sung at football games. According to College Fight Songs: An Annotated Anthology published in 1998, \"Down the Field\" ranks as the fourth-greatest fight song of all time. \n\nThe school mascot is \" Handsome Dan \", the Yale bulldog , and the Yale fight song contains the refrain, \"Bulldog, bulldog, bow wow wow\". The school color, since 1894, is Yale Blue . Yale's Handsome Dan is believed to be the first college mascot in America, having been established in 1889. \n\nYale has faced significant criticism for its handling of student mental health on campus. Suicidal and depressed students say that Yale forced them to medically withdraw rather than provide them with academic accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act , and in 2018 the Ruderman Family Foundation ranked Yale as having the worst mental health policies in the Ivy League. \n\nDear Yale, I loved being here. I only wish I could've had some time. I needed time to work things out and to wait for new medication to kick in, but I couldn't do it in school, and I couldn't bear the thought of having to leave for a full year, or of leaving and never being readmitted. Love, Luchang.\n\nStudents at Yale say that the university's policies force them to hide their depression and avoid seeking help, for fear of being forced to leave. One prominent case was the suicide of Luchang Wang in 2015, who died by suicide after making a Facebook post saying that she needed time to deal with her mental health issues, but could not deal with being forced to medically withdraw for an entire year with an uncertain chance of being readmitted. Wang had previously withdrawn from school due to mental health issues, and was afraid of being forced to withdraw again, as a second readmission attempt would be considerably more difficult for her. A friend of Wang said that she routinely lied to her university therapist to avoid being kicked out, and another student said that many at Yale lie to their counselors as \"there's no clear standard established that says exactly what students will get involuntarily hospitalized or withdrawn for\". In response, the university convened a commission to evaluate their readmission policies after a mental health withdrawal, renaming the process to \"reinstatement\", eliminating the $50 reapplication fee, and giving students 5-6 more days to make their decision on a mental health withdrawal. \n\nFor students that do seek help, waitlists for therapy can be months long, with individual counselling sessions only 30 minutes in length. In 2022, after a Washington Post article about their medical withdrawal policies, the school increased the number of mental health clinicians on campus from 51 to 60 as well as promised further changes. In 2023, after a lawsuit was filed against the school for what the plaintiffs described as discrimination, the university changed the name of a \"medical withdrawal\" to a \"medical leave of absence\" saying that the \"leave of absence\" terminology would allow students to remain on Yale's insurance while away from the school. The new policy also allowed for students on a leave of absence to participate in extracurricular clubs and visit campus, something a student on medical withdrawal was banned from doing. A representative of Yale also said that the criticism of their policies \"misrepresents our efforts and unwavering commitment to supporting our students, whose well-being and success are our primary focus\" and that \"the mental health of our students is a very, very high priority\". \n\nAfter the death of undergraduate student Rachael Shaw Rosenbaum by suicide, an organization called Elis for Rachael was formed, advocating for mental health-related reforms. The group has sued Yale, demanding changes. \n\nYale has had many financial supporters, but some stand out by the magnitude or timeliness of their contributions. Among those who have made large donations commemorated at the university are: Elihu Yale , Jeremiah Dummer , the Vanderbilt family, the Harkness family ( Edward , Anna , and William ), the Beinecke family (Edwin, Frederick , and Walter), John William Sterling , Payne Whitney , Joseph Earl Sheffield , Paul Mellon , Charles B. G. Murphy , Joseph Tsai , William K. Lanman , and Stephen Schwarzman . The Yale Class of 1954, led by Richard Gilder , donated $70 million in commemoration of their 50th reunion. Charles B. Johnson , a 1954 graduate of Yale College, pledged a $250 million gift in 2013 to support the construction of two new residential colleges. The colleges have been named respectively in honor of Pauli Murray and Benjamin Franklin . A $100 million contribution by Stephen Adams enabled the Yale School of Music to become tuition-free and the Adams Center for Musical Arts to be built, while a $150 million contribution by David Geffen enabled the Yale School of Drama (renamed the David Geffen School of Drama at Yale ) to become tuition-free as well.\n\nYale has produced many distinguished alumni in various fields, in both the public and private sectors. According to 2020 data, around 71% of undergraduates join the workforce, while 17% attend graduate or professional schools. Yale graduates have been recipients of 263 Rhodes Scholarships , 123 Marshall Scholarships , 67 Truman Scholarships , 21 Churchill Scholarships , and 9 Mitchell Scholarships . The university is the 2nd largest producer of Fulbright Scholars , with 1,244 in its history and 89 MacArthur Fellows . The U.S. Department of State Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs ranked Yale fifth among research institutions producing the most 2020–2021 Fulbright Scholars. 31 living billionaires are alumni. \n\nOne of the most popular undergraduate majors is political science, with many going on to serve in government and politics. Former presidents who attended for undergrad include William Howard Taft , George H. W. Bush , and George W. Bush while former presidents Gerald Ford and Bill Clinton attended Yale Law School. Vice President JD Vance graduated from Yale Law School. Former vice president and influential antebellum era politician John C. Calhoun also graduated from Yale. Former world leaders include Italian prime minister Mario Monti , Turkish prime minister Tansu Çiller , South Korean prime minister Lee Hong-koo , Mexican president Ernesto Zedillo , German president Karl Carstens , Philippine president José Paciano Laurel , Latvian president Valdis Zatlers , Taiwanese premier Jiang Yi-huah , and Malawian president Peter Mutharika , among others. Prominent royals who graduated are Crown Princess Victoria of Sweden , and Olympia Bonaparte, Princess Napoléon . \n\nAlumni have had considerable presence in U.S. government in all three branches. On the U.S. Supreme Court , 19 justices have been alumni, including current Associate Justices Sonia Sotomayor , Samuel Alito , Clarence Thomas , and Brett Kavanaugh . Alumni have been U.S. Senators , including current senators Michael Bennet , Richard Blumenthal , Cory Booker , Sherrod Brown , Chris Coons , Amy Klobuchar , Sheldon Whitehouse . Current and former cabinet members include Secretaries of State John Kerry , Hillary Clinton , Cyrus Vance , and Dean Acheson ; U.S. Secretaries of the Treasury Oliver Wolcott , Robert Rubin , Nicholas F. Brady , Steven Mnuchin , Janet Yellen , and Scott Bessent ; U.S. Attorneys General Nicholas Katzenbach , Edwin Meese , John Ashcroft , and Edward H. Levi ; and many others. Peace Corps founder and American diplomat Sargent Shriver and public official and urban planner Robert Moses are Yale alumni.\n\nYale has produced numerous award-winning authors and influential writers, like Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Sinclair Lewis and Pulitzer Prize winners Stephen Vincent Benét , Thornton Wilder , Doug Wright , and David McCullough . Academy Award winning actors, actresses, and directors include Jodie Foster , Paul Newman , Meryl Streep , Elia Kazan , George Roy Hill , Lupita Nyong'o , Oliver Stone , and Frances McDormand . Alumni from Yale have also made notable contributions to both music and the arts. Leading American composer from the 20th century Charles Ives , Broadway composer Cole Porter , Grammy award winner David Lang , multi- Tony Award winner Composer and Musicologist Maury Yeston , and award-winning jazz pianist and composer Vijay Iyer all hail from Yale. Hugo Boss Prize winner Matthew Barney , famed American sculptor Richard Serra , President Barack Obama presidential portrait painter Kehinde Wiley , MacArthur Fellows and contemporary artists Tschabalala Self , Titus Kaphar , Richard Whitten , and Sarah Sze , Pulitzer Prize winning cartoonist Garry Trudeau , and National Medal of Arts photorealist painter Chuck Close all graduated from Yale. Additional alumni include architect and Presidential Medal of Freedom winner Maya Lin , Pritzker Prize winner Norman Foster , and Gateway Arch designer Eero Saarinen . Journalists and pundits include Dick Cavett , Chris Cuomo , Anderson Cooper , William F. Buckley Jr. , Blake Hounshell , and Fareed Zakaria . \n\nIn business, Yale has had numerous alumni and former students go on to become founders of influential business, like William Boeing ( Boeing , United Airlines ), Briton Hadden and Henry Luce ( Time Magazine ), Stephen A. Schwarzman ( Blackstone Group ), Frederick W. Smith ( FedEx ), Juan Trippe ( Pan Am ), Harold Stanley ( Morgan Stanley ), Bing Gordon ( Electronic Arts ), and Ben Silbermann ( Pinterest ). Other business people from Yale include former chairman and CEO of Sears Holdings Edward Lampert , former Time Warner president Jeffrey Bewkes , former PepsiCo chairperson and CEO Indra Nooyi , sports agent Donald Dell , and investor/philanthropist Sir John Templeton , \n\nAlumni distinguished in academia include literary critic and historian Henry Louis Gates , economists Irving Fischer , Mahbub ul Haq , and Nobel Prize laureate Paul Krugman ; Nobel Prize in Physics laureates Ernest Lawrence and Murray Gell-Mann ; Fields Medalist John G. Thompson ; Human Genome Project leader and National Institutes of Health director Francis S. Collins ; brain surgery pioneer Harvey Cushing ; pioneering computer scientist Grace Hopper ; influential mathematician and chemist Josiah Willard Gibbs ; National Women's Hall of Fame inductee and biochemist Florence B. Seibert ; Turing Award recipient Ron Rivest ; inventors Samuel F.B. Morse and Eli Whitney ; Nobel Prize in Chemistry laureate John B. Goodenough ; lexicographer Noah Webster ; and theologians Jonathan Edwards and Reinhold Niebuhr . \n\nIn the sporting arena, alumni include baseball players Ron Darling and Craig Breslow who in the major leagues played with fellow Yale alum Ryan Lavarnway and baseball executives Theo Epstein and George Weiss ; football players Calvin Hill , Gary Fenick , Amos Alonzo Stagg , and \"the Father of American Football\" Walter Camp ; ice hockey players Chris Higgins and Olympian Helen Resor ; Olympic figure skating champions Sarah Hughes and Nathan Chen ; nine-time U.S. Squash men's champion Julian Illingworth ; Olympic swimmer Don Schollander ; Olympic rowers Josh West and Rusty Wailes ; Olympic sailor Stuart McNay ; Olympic runner Frank Shorter ; and others.\n\nYale University is a cultural referent as an institution that produces some of the most elite members of society and its grounds, alumni, and students have been prominently portrayed in fiction and U.S. popular culture. For example, Owen Johnson 's novel Stover at Yale follows the college career of Dink Stover, and Frank Merriwell , the model for all later juvenile sports fiction, plays football, baseball, crew, and track at Yale while solving mysteries and righting wrongs. Yale University also is mentioned in F. Scott Fitzgerald's novel The Great Gatsby . The narrator, Nick Carraway, wrote a series of editorials for the Yale News , and Tom Buchanan was \"one of the most powerful ends that ever played football\" for Yale.",
  "A boy player was a male child or teenager who performed in Medieval and English Renaissance playing companies . Some boy players worked for adult companies and performed the female roles, since women were not allowed to perform on the English stage during this period. Others worked for children's companies in which all roles, not just the female ones, were played by boys. (pp 1–76) \n\nIn the Elizabethan and Jacobean periods, troupes appeared that were composed entirely of boy players. They are famously mentioned in Shakespeare 's Hamlet , in which a group of travelling actors has left the city due to rivalry with a troupe of \"little eyases\" (II, ii, 339); the term \"eyas\" means an unfledged hawk . \n\nThe children's companies grew out of the choirs of boy singers that had been connected with cathedrals and similar institutions since the Middle Ages . (Similar boy choirs exist to this day.) Thus the choir attached to St. Paul's Cathedral in London since the 12th century was in the 16th century molded into a company of child actors , the Children of Paul's . (pp 8–22) Similar groups of boy actors were connected with other institutions, including Eton , the Merchant Taylors School, and the ecclesiastical college at Windsor . (pp 68–76)\n\nThe boys were generally in the range of 8–12 years old (prepubescent boys are chosen as choirboys precisely because their voices have not yet \"broken\" with puberty ). They were musically talented, strictly disciplined, educated in the trivium (grammar, logic, rhetoric ), and sometimes fluent in Latin. The boys amounted to formidable competition for the companies of adult actors in Elizabethan England. (p 46) Between 1558 and 1576 (the year James Burbage built The Theatre in London and the age of popular Elizabethan drama began), companies of boy actors performed 46 times at Court, versus only 32 times for companies of adult actors in the same period. The playwright John Lyly earned fame when his \"Euphuistic\" plays were acted at Court by the Children of Paul's in the 1260.\n\nThe practice of children acting was never free of controversy, however. Companies of child actors went out of fashion for a decade.\n\nIn 1600, however, the practice saw a resurgence: the Children of the Chapel performed at the private Blackfriars Theatre for much of the first decade of the 17th century. (pp 23–60) Their performances of the plays of Ben Jonson were especially popular. (The Globe Theatre was decorated with a statue of Hercules , the playhouse's symbol.) The Children of Paul's were also acting publicly once again at this time.\n\nThe children probably attained their greatest notoriety during the Poetomachia or War of the Theatres ( 1599 – 1601 ). Two troupes were intimately involved on the competing sides: the Children of Paul's acted John Marston 's Jack Drum's Entertainment (1600) and What You Will (1601) and Thomas Dekker 's Satiromastix (1601), while the Children of the Chapel had Jonson's Cynthia's Revels (1600) and The Poetaster (1601).\n\nThe boys' troupes were strongly associated with the satirical comedy of Jonson, Marston, and Thomas Middleton , which has sometimes been described as a coterie drama for gentleman \"wits\", in contrast to the popular drama of writers like Shakespeare and Thomas Heywood that was performed at the Globe and the other large public theatres. Yet the boys also played serious tragedies and contemporary histories, notably the works of George Chapman – Bussy D'Ambois , The Revenge of Bussy D'Ambois , and the double play The Conspiracy and Tragedy of Charles, Duke of Byron . Modern readers and theatergoers can only wonder what these productions were like.\n\nThe brand of coterie drama practiced by Jonson and others was often controversial, however; the official displeasure that greeted the play Eastward Ho , which landed two of its authors in jail, also fell upon the boys who performed it. By 1606 the Children of Paul's had ceased performing, and the Children of the Chapel were no longer associated with the Royal Chapel and had lost royal patronage; they became merely the Children of the Blackfriars. The boys' troupes had ceased public dramatic performance and the fashion died out by about 1615. The Lady Elizabeth's Men was a new company granted a patent on 27 April 1615 , under the patronage of King James' daughter Princess Elizabeth ; it was composed, to some significant degree, of veterans of the children's companies, now grown to manhood. (pp 246–260)\n\nWhile controversial in their time, the children's companies had been effective in funnelling talented, educated, and experienced young actors into the adult companies. To recapture this influence, Richard Gunnell attempted to start a children's company with 14 boys and several adults when he built the Salisbury Court Theatre in 1629 . The enterprise was not a success, because of a long closure of the theatres due to plague soon after its inception; but it did produce Stephen Hammerton , who went on to act with the King's Men, and became an early matinee idol among young women in the audience for his romantic leads. (pp 63–64)\n\nA limited renewal of the practice of children's companies came in 1637 , when Christopher Beeston established, under royal warrant, the King and Queen's Young Company, colloquially called Beeston's Boys . The intent was in part to have a structure for training young actors – much as the choirs of the previous century had provided educated and capable talent (though the actors in Beeston's company tended to be older than the boys of the earlier troupes). After the elder Beeston's death in 1638, his son William Beeston continued the company, with uneven success, till the theatres closed in 1642; he even managed to re-form Beeston's Boys for a time once the theatres re-opened in the Restoration .\n\nIn playing companies of adult actors, boys were initially given the female parts, but women were permitted to act on the stage from December 1661. A law against women on stage was implemented in England until that time. Prepubescent boys were used for their unbroken voices, an accepted practice.\n\nBoy actors in adult companies apparently served as apprentices, in ways comparable to the practices of other guilds and trades of the age, though for shorter terms – perhaps two or three years instead of the usual seven. (The companies of adult actors were, in Elizabethan legal terms, retainers in noble households, and thus not subject to the legal statutes governing apprentices.) [ citation needed ] [ a ] They performed female roles (and, of course, roles of male children if required) alongside adult male actors playing men or older female parts. In reference to Shakespeare's company, variously the Lord Chamberlain's Men (1594–1603) or the King's Men (1603 and after): Augustine Phillips left bequests to an apprentice, James Sands , and a former apprentice, Samuel Gilburne , in his will, read after his death in 1605; company members William Ostler , John Underwood , Nathan Field , and John Rice had all started their acting careers as Children of the Chapel at the Blackfriars Theatre .\n\nOne question has persisted: Did boys play all female roles in English Renaissance theatre , or were some roles, the most demanding ones, played by adult males? Some literary critics and some ordinary readers have found it incredible that the most formidable and complex female roles created by Shakespeare and Webster could have been played by \"children\". The available evidence is incomplete and occasionally ambiguous; however, the overall implication is that even the largest roles were played by boys or young men, not mature adults.\n\nIn a recent detailed survey of the evidence for the ages of boy actors and their roles, scholar David Kathman concludes that \"No significant evidence supports the idea that such roles were played by adult sharers but a wealth of specific evidence demonstrates that they were played by adolescent boys no older than about twenty-one\". (p 246) There are only two possible examples of adult actors playing female roles. The first appears in the cast list for John Fletcher 's The Wild Goose Chase , in which the veteran comedian John Shank is listed; the entry reads \"Petella, their waiting-woman. Their Servant Mr. Shanck .\" However, Kathman argues that this refers to two roles, not one: Shank did not play Petella, but a comic servant who appears later in the play. (p 234) The second example is the cast list for Thomas Heywood 's The Fair Maid of the West , in which Anthony Turner apparently played the tiny role of a kitchen maid. Kathman suspects this is merely a misprint, but concludes that even if Turner did play this role, there remains no evidence for adults playing leading roles. (p 238)\n\nMany boy actors filled female roles for a few years, then switched to male roles. An example: John Honyman started playing female roles for the King's Men at age 13, in 1626, in Philip Massinger 's The Roman Actor . He played females for the next three years, through the King's Men's productions of Lodowick Carlell 's The Deserving Favourite and Massinger's The Picture (both in 1629 ). Yet in 1630, at age 17, Honyman switched to male roles and never returned to female roles. Other boy players with the King's Men, John Thompson and Richard Sharpe , appear to have played women for a decade or more, to the point at which they must have been \"young men\" rather than \"boys.\" Theophilus Bird played a woman when he was in his early 20s; but then he too switched to male roles.\n\nAudience members occasionally recorded positive impressions of the quality of the acting of boy players. When one Henry Jackson saw the King's Men perform Othello at Oxford in 1610, he wrote of the cast's Desdemona in his diary, \"She [sic] always acted the matter very well, in her death moved us still more greatly; when lying in bed she implored the pity of those watching with her countenance alone.\" The mere fact that Jackson referred to the boy as \"she\", when he certainly knew better rationally, may in itself testify to the strength of the illusion.\n\nMany Puritan preachers, who hated the theatre in general, were outraged by the use of boy players, which they believed encouraged homosexual lust. In 1583, Philip Stubbes complained that plays were full of \"such wanton gestures, such bawdy speeches ... such kissing and bussing\" that playgoers would go home together \"very friendly ... and play the sodomites, or worse.\" John Rainolds warned of the \"filthy sparkles of lust to that vice the putting of women's attire on men may kindle in unclean affections.\" \n\nIn response to such comments, the actor-playwright Thomas Heywood protested that audiences were capable of distancing themselves: \"To see our youths attired in the habit of women, who knows not what their intents be? Who cannot distinguish them by their names, assuredly knowing they are but to represent such a lady, at such a time appointed?\" \n\nThe boy player has been a popular subject in literary, theatrical and cinematic representations of the Elizabethan theatre.",
  "Jajim ( Persian : جاجیم ; Azerbaijani : Cecim ; Turkish : Cicim ; Russian : Джаджим ) also spelled as gelims , or jajim-bafi , is a handmade, flat-woven textile made of colored natural fiber which is created and used in the majority of villages and rural areas of Iran . Other locations the Jajim is found include Azerbaijan , Turkey , and India .\n\nThe nomadic Shahsevan people are thought to be the originators of the handicraft. Jajim is a thicker textile, similar to a blanket. The yarn used to created Jajim are either wool, cotton, or a wool and cotton-blend. In contrast to the classically woven kilims and carpets which is a single panel, to weave a Jajim you create multiple narrow woven panels (often 4) and the panels are sewn together. \n\nThey traditionally were used as way for nomadic people to pack their belongings for migration. They have also been used as a mattress, to wrap a bed, as a korsi cover (a table heater), as a curtain, as a tent, and as a carpet. After a Qashqai bride and groom are married, they use Jajim to create a ceremonial tent. \n\nSince 2020, the Iran Ministry of Cultural Heritage, Handicrafts and Tourism has been investing money in promoting the ancient craft through an educational program. Several museum collections have Jajims, include at the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco (FAMSF). ",
  "Free Cinema was a documentary film movement that emerged in the United Kingdom in the mid-1950s. The term referred to an absence of propagandised intent or deliberate box office appeal. Co-founded by Lindsay Anderson (but he later disdained the 'movement' tag) with Karel Reisz , Tony Richardson and Lorenza Mazzetti , the movement began with a programme of three short films at the National Film Theatre , London on 5 February 1956. The programme was such a success that five more programmes appeared under the ‘Free Cinema’ banner before the founders decided to end the series. The last event was held in March 1959. Three of the screenings consisted of work from overseas filmmakers. \n\nTogether with Gavin Lambert , Anderson and Reisz had previously founded the short-lived but influential journal Sequence , of which Anderson later wrote 'No Film Can Be Too Personal'. So ran the initial pronouncement in the first Free Cinema manifesto. It could equally well have been the motto of SEQUENCE'. \n\nThe manifesto was drawn up by Anderson and Mazzetti at a Charing Cross cafe named The Soup Kitchen, where Mazzetti worked. It read:\n\nThese films were not made together; nor with the\nidea of showing them together. But when they came together, we felt they had an attitude in common.\nImplicit in this attitude is a belief in freedom, in the importance of people and the significance of\nthe everyday. As filmmakers we believe that No film can be too personal. The image speaks. Sound amplifies and comments. Size is irrelevant. Perfection is not an aim. An attitude means a style. A style means an attitude. \n\nAt an interview in 2001, Mazzetti explained that the reference to size was prompted by the then-new experiments in CinemaScope and other large screen formats. \"The image speaks\" was an assertion of the primacy of the image over the sound. Reisz said that ‘An attitude means a style’ meant that ‘a style is not a matter of camera angles or fancy footwork, it's an expression, an accurate expression of your particular opinion’. \n\nThe first ‘Free Cinema’ programme featured just three films:\n\nThe films were accompanied by the above provocative film manifesto , written chiefly by Anderson, which brought the film-makers valuable publicity. Later programmes brought in like minded filmmakers, among them Alain Tanner and Claude Goretta (with Nice Time ), Michael Grigsby and Robert Vas . The two film technicians closely associated with the movement were Walter Lassally and John Fletcher. The three of the six programmes were devoted to foreign work, including the new Polish cinema (fourth programme), emerging French New Wave (fifth programme); and American independent filmmaker Lionel Rogosin was invited to screen his ground-breaking film On the Bowery at the second Free Cinema programme in September 1956. That event also included Norman McLaren 's Neighbours and Georges Franju 's Le Sang des bêtes . \n\nThe films were free in the sense that they were made outside the confines of the film industry and were distinguished by their style and attitude and the conditions of production. All of the films were made cheaply, for no more than a few hundred pounds, mostly with grants from the British Film Institute 's Experimental Film Fund. Some of the later films were sponsored by the Ford Motor Company or funded independently. They were typically shot in black and white on 16mm film , using lightweight, hand-held cameras, usually with a non-synchronised soundtrack added separately. Most of the films deliberately omitted narration. The film-makers shared a determination to focus on ordinary, largely working-class British subjects. They felt these people had been overlooked by the middle-class -dominated British film industry of the time.\n\nThe founders of the movement were dismissive of mainstream documentary film-making in Britain, particularly of the Documentary Film Movement of the 1930s and 1940s associated with John Grierson , although they made an exception for Humphrey Jennings . Another acknowledged influence was French director Jean Vigo (1905–34). Free Cinema bears some similarities to the cinéma vérité and Direct Cinema movements.\n\nFree Cinema was a major influence on the British New Wave of the late 1950s and early 1960s, and all of the founders except Mazzetti would make films associated with the movement. Richardson directed Look Back in Anger (1958), A Taste of Honey (1961) and The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner (1962); Reisz directed Saturday Night and Sunday Morning (1960); and Anderson directed This Sporting Life (1963) and If.... (1968).\n\nMany of these films have also been categorized as part of the kitchen sink realism genre, and many of them are adaptations of novels or plays written by members of Britain's so-called \" angry young men \".",
  "A perfumer is an expert on creating perfume compositions, sometimes referred to affectionately as a nose ( French : nez ) due to their fine sense of smell and skill in producing olfactory compositions. The perfumer is effectively an artist who is trained in depth on the concepts of fragrance aesthetics and who is capable of conveying abstract concepts and moods with compositions. At the most rudimentary level, a perfumer must have a keen knowledge of a large variety of fragrance ingredients and their smells, and be able to distinguish each one alone or in combination with others. They must also know how each reveals itself over time. The job of the perfumer is very similar to that of flavourists , who compose smells and flavourants for commercial food products.\n\nMost past perfumers did not undergo professional training in the art, and many learned their craft as apprentices under another perfumer in their employment as technicians (in charge of blending formulas) or chemists. These people were usually given temporary jobs in the industry. A direct entrance into the profession is rare, and those who do typically enter it through family contacts. Such apprenticeships last around three years.\n\nUntil recently, professional schools open to the public did not exist. In 1970 ISIPCA became the first school in perfumery. Candidates must pass a demanding entrance examination, and must have taken university -level courses in organic chemistry .\n\nSince 1998 PerfumersWorld's school has offered formal and informal training through university courses at King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi Biotechnology faculty, at Chulalongkorn University Pharmacy faculty and through online courses and private workshops in the United States, UK, Dubai, Hong Kong, Germany, New Zealand, and Thailand.\n\nMore recently, in 2002, another school was born, the Grasse Institute of Perfumery (G.I.P). Similarly here, candidates must have a foundation in chemistry or pharmacy to be accepted as students. Grasse itself is a world-renowned perfume centre. \n\nGivaudan , International Flavors and Fragrances (IFF) and Symrise operate their own perfumery schools, but students must be employees and recommended by their managers. The University of Plymouth (UK) offers a BA (Bachelor of Arts) course in Business & Perfumery.\n\nMost perfumers are employed by large fragrance corporations including Mane , Robertet , Firmenich , IFF , Givaudan , Takasago , and Symrise . Some work exclusively for a perfume house or in their own companies, but these are not as common.\n\nThe perfumer typically begins a project with a brief by their employer or a customer, typically a fashion house or other large corporation . This will contain the specifications for the desired perfume, and will describe in often poetic or abstract terms what it should smell like or what feelings it should evoke, along with a maximum price per litre of the perfume oil concentrate. This allowance, along with the intended application of the perfume, will determine what aromatic ingredients will be used in the composition.\n\nThe perfumer will then go through the process of blending multiple mixtures and will attempt to capture the desired feelings specified in the brief. After presenting the perfume mixtures to the customers, the perfumer may \"win\" the brief with their approval. They proceed to work with the customer, often with the direction provided by a panel or artistic director, which guides and edits the modifications on the composition of the perfume. This process typically spans several months to several years, going through many iterations, and may involve cultural and public surveys to tailor a perfume to a particular market. The composition will then be either used to enhance another product as a functional fragrance ( shampoos , make-up , detergents , car interiors, etc.) or marketed directly to the public as a fine fragrance .\n\nAlternatively, the perfumer may simply be inspired to create a perfume and produce something that later becomes marketable or wins a brief. This is more common in smaller or independent perfume houses. \n\nFor a long time, perfumes were associated with the brand name on the bottle. In 2000, Frédéric Malle was the first to include on the bottles of the perfumes he launched the names of the perfumers who composed them, and who were considered by his house as their authors. In the following decade, perfumers became an integral part of fragrance messaging and were increasingly placed in the spotlight.",
  "Environmental art is a range of artistic practices encompassing both historical approaches to nature in art and more recent ecological and politically motivated types of works. Environmental art has evolved away from formal concerns, for example monumental earthworks using earth as a sculptural material , towards a deeper relationship to systems, processes and phenomena in relationship to social concerns. Integrated social and ecological approaches developed as an ethical, restorative stance emerged in the 1990s. Environmental art has become a focal point of exhibitions around the world as the social and cultural aspects of climate change come to the forefront.\n\nThe term \"environmental art\" often encompasses \"ecological\" concerns but is not specific to them. It primarily celebrates an artist's connection with nature using natural materials. The concept is best understood in relationship to historic earth/Land art and the evolving field of ecological art . The field is interdisciplinary in the fact that environmental artists embrace ideas from science and philosophy. The practice encompasses traditional media, new media and critical social forms of production. The work embraces a full range of landscape/environmental conditions from the rural, to the suburban and urban as well as urban/rural industrial.\n\nEnvironmental art arguably began with the Paleolithic cave paintings . While no landscape paintings have yet been found, the cave paintings represented other aspects of nature important to early humans , such as animals and human figures. \"They are prehistoric observations of nature. In one-way or another, nature for centuries remained the preferential theme of creative art.\" More modern examples of environmental art stem from landscape painting and representation. When artists painted onsite they developed a deep connection with the surrounding environment and its weather and brought these close observations into their canvases. John Constable's sky paintings \"most closely represent the sky in nature\". Claude Monet 's Houses of Parliament Series also exemplifies the artist's connection with the environment. \"For me, a landscape does not exist in its own right, since its appearance changes at every moment; but the surrounding atmosphere brings it to life, the air and the light, which vary continually for me, it is only the surrounding atmosphere that gives subjects their true value.\" \n\nContemporary painters, such as Diane Burko represent natural phenomena—and its change over time—to convey ecological issues, drawing attention to climate change. Alexis Rockman 's landscapes depict a sardonic view of climate change and humankind's interventions with other species by way of genetic engineering. \n\nThe growth of environmental art as an art movement began in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In its early phases it was most associated with sculpture—especially Site-specific art , Land art and Arte povera —having arisen out of mounting criticism of traditional sculptural forms and practices that were increasingly seen as outmoded and potentially out of harmony with the natural environment.\n\nIn October 1968, Robert Smithson organized an exhibition at Dwan Gallery in New York City which was titled “Earthworks.” The works in the show posed an explicit challenge to conventional notions of exhibition and sales, in that they were either too large or too unwieldy to be collected; most were represented only by photographs, further emphasizing their resistance to acquisition. For these artists escaping the confines of the gallery and modernist theory was achieved by leaving the cities and going out into the desert.\n\n”They were not depicting the landscape, but engaging it; their art was not simply of the landscape, but in it as well.” This shift in the late 1960s and 1970s represents an avant garde notion of sculpture, the landscape and our relationship with it. The work challenged the conventional means to create sculpture, but also defied more elite modes of art dissemination and exhibition, such as the Dwan Gallery show mentioned earlier. This shift opened up a new space and in doing so expanded the ways in which work was documented and conceptualized. \n\nJust as the earthworks in the deserts of the west grew out of notions of landscape painting, the growth of public art stimulated artists to engage the urban landscape as another environment and also as a platform to engage ideas and concepts about the environment to a larger audience. While this earlier work was mostly created in the deserts of the American west, the end of the 1970s and the beginning of the 1980s saw works moving into the public landscape. Artists like Robert Morris began engaging county departments and public arts commissions to create works in public spaces such as an abandoned gravel pit. Herbert Bayer used a similar approach and was selected to create his Mill Creek Canyon Earthworks in 1982. The project served functions such as erosion control, a place to serve as a reservoir during high rain periods, and a 2.5 acre park during dry seasons. Lucy Lippard 's groundbreaking book, on the parallel between contemporary land art and prehistoric sites, examined the ways in which these prehistoric cultures, forms and images have \"overlaid\" onto the work of contemporary artists working with the land and natural systems. \n\nIn 1965, Alan Sonfist introduced a key environmentalist idea of bringing nature back into the urban environment with his first historical Time Landscape sculpture, proposed to New York City in 1965 and revealed to the public in 1978 in a mature, grown state. Time Landscape still remains visible at the corner of Houston and LaGuardia in New York City's Greenwich Village. The work resulted in a \"slowly developing forest that represents the Manhattan landscape inhabited by Native Americans and encountered by Dutch settlers in the early 17th century.\" \n\nEnvironmental art also encompasses the scope of the urban landscape. Pioneering environmental artist, Mary Miss began creating art in the urban environment with her 1969 installation, Ropes/Shore, and continues to develop projects involving extended communities through City as a Living Laboratory. Agnes Denes created a work in downtown Manhattan Wheatfield - A Confrontation (1982) in which she planted a field of wheat on the two-acre site of a landfill covered with urban detritus and rubble. The site is now Battery Park City and the World Financial Center, a transformation from ecologic power to economic power. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1974, Bonnie Sherk created The Farm in San Francisco, a 7-acre urban garden in underused spaces below freeway overpasses. The farm, until 1980, also served as a community center and art space that provided internships, childhood ecoart education for children, and served as a public park during its six-year existence. \n\nAndrea Polli's installation Particle Falls made particulate matter in the air visible in a way that passersby could see. For HighWaterLine Eve Mosher and others walked through neighborhoods in at-risk cities such as New York City and Miami, marking the projected flood damage which could occur as a result of climate change and talking with\nresidents about what they were doing. \n\nStarting in the 2010s \"guerilla gardener\" Ron Finley began planting edible gardens in the urban neighborhood of South Central Los Angeles along narrow strips of dirt between the curb and sidewalk. His motivation was to address the effects of the food apartheid in certain neighborhoods including his own, and to encourage healthy eating habits, especially among children. \n\nIn general use, the term 'Eco-art' or 'Environmental art' refers loosely to a range of artistic practices and works \"that explore and respond to issues related to the environment, climate change, and ecological sustainability.\" In more technical and academic contexts, Ecological art , also known as ecoart, tends to refer more precisely to an artistic practice or discipline proposing paradigms sustainable with the life forms and resources of Earth. It is composed of artists, scientists, philosophers and activists who are devoted to the practices of ecological art. Historical precedents include Earthworks, Land Art, and landscape painting/photography. Ecoart is distinguished by a focus on systems and interrelationships within our environment: the ecological, geographic, political, biological and cultural. Ecoart creates awareness, stimulates dialogue, changes human behavior towards other species, and encourages the long-term respect for the natural systems we coexist with. It manifests as socially engaged, activist, community-based restorative or interventionist art. Ecological artist, Aviva Rahmani believes that \"Ecological art is an art practice, often in collaboration with scientists, city planners, architects and others, that results in direct intervention in environmental degradation . Often, the artist is the lead agent in that practice.\" \n\nThere are numerous approaches to ecoart including but not limited to: representational artworks that address the environment through images and objects; remediation projects that restore polluted environments; activist projects that engage others and activate change of behaviors and/or public policy; time-based social sculptures that involve communities in monitoring their landscapes and taking a participatory role in sustainable practices; ecopoetic projects that initiate a re-envisioning and re-enchantment with the natural world, inspiring healing and co-existence with other species;\ndirect-encounter artworks that involve natural phenomena such as water, weather, sunlight, or plants; pedagogical artworks that share information about environmental injustice and ecological problems such as water and soil pollution and health hazards; relational aesthetics that involve sustainable, off-the-grid, permaculture existences. [ citation needed ]\n\nThere is discussion and debate among ecoartists regarding whether ecological art should be considered a discrete discipline within the arts, distinct from environmental art. A current definition of ecological art, drafted collectively by the EcoArtNetwork is \"Ecological art is an art practice that embraces an ethic of social justice in both its content and form/materials. Ecoart is created to inspire caring and respect, stimulate dialogue, and encourage the long-term flourishing of the social and natural environments in which we live. It commonly manifests as socially engaged, activist, community-based restorative or interventionist art.\" The global community ArtTech NatureCulture , which convenes over 400 creative practitioners engaged in ecological art forms across disciplines, states: \"In precarious times, how can we build new ways forward that challenge and transform the many inequalities of the status quo? Our ways of addressing this are as diverse as our backgrounds, but we are united by a shared interest in using creative practices across disciplines (from arts, design, culture and hacking to science, technology and activism) to explore alternative futures that rethink, rebuild and heal.\" Co-founder Kit Braybrooke has described the reason for ArtTech NatureCulture as \"alone, we face climate grief and instability, but together, we rebuild.\" \n\nArtists who work in this field generally subscribe to one or more of the following principles: focus on the web of interrelationships in the environment—on the physical, biological, cultural, political, and historical aspects of ecological systems; create works that employ natural materials or engage with environmental forces such as wind, water, or sunlight; reclaim, restore, and remediate damaged environments; inform the public about ecological dynamics and the environmental problems we face; revise ecological relationships, creatively proposing new possibilities for coexistence, sustainability, and healing. \n\nContributions by women in the area of EcoArt are significant. Many are cataloged in WEAD, Women Environmental Artists Directory founded in 1995 by Jo Hanson, Susan Leibovitz Steinman and Estelle Akamine. The work of ecofeminist writers inspired early male and female practitioners to address their concerns about a more horizontal relationship to environmental issues in their own practices. The feminist art writer Lucy Lippard , writing for the Weather Report Show she curated in 2007 at the Boulder Museum of Contemporary Art, which included many environmental, ecological and ecofeminist artists , commented on how many of those artists were women. \n\nWithin environmental art, a crucial distinction can be made between environmental artists who do not consider the possible damage to the environment that their artwork may incur, and those whose intent is to cause no harm to nature. For example, despite its aesthetic merits, the American artist Robert Smithson 's celebrated sculpture Spiral Jetty (1969) inflicted permanent damage upon the landscape he worked with, using a bulldozer to scrape and cut the land, with the spiral itself impinging upon the lake. Similarly, criticism was raised against the European sculptor Christo when he temporarily wrapped the coastline at Little Bay, south of Sydney, Australia, in 1969. Conservationists' comments attracted international attention in environmental circles and led contemporary artists in the region to rethink the inclinations of land art and site-specific art. [ citation needed ]\n\nSustainable art is produced with consideration for the wider impact of the work and its reception in relationship to its environments (social, economic, biophysical, historical, and cultural). Some artists choose to minimize their potential impact, while other works involve restoring the immediate landscape to a natural state. \n\nBritish sculptor Richard Long has for several decades made temporary outdoor sculptural work by rearranging natural materials found on site, such as rocks, mud and branches, which will therefore have no lingering detrimental effect. [ citation needed ] Chris Drury instituted a work entitled \" Medicine Wheel \" which was the result of a daily meditative walk, once a day, for a calendar year. The deliverable of this work was a mandala of mosaicked found objects: nature art as process art . [ citation needed ]\n\nLeading environmental artists such as British artist and poet, Hamish Fulton , Dutch sculptor Herman de Vries , the Australian sculptor John Davis and the British sculptor Andy Goldsworthy similarly leave the landscape they have worked with unharmed; in some cases they have revegetated damaged land with appropriate indigenous flora in the process of making their work. In this way the work of art arises out of a sensitivity towards habitat. [ citation needed ]\n\nPerhaps the most celebrated instance of environmental art in the late 20th century was 7000 Oaks , an ecological action staged at Documenta during 1982 by Joseph Beuys , in which the artist and his assistants highlighted the condition of the local environment by planting 7000 oak trees throughout and around the city of Kassel . [ citation needed ]\n\nThe potential role of art/eco-art in engendering socio-environmental transformation is becoming more widely discussed, as are the systemic obstacles to that transformation. In considering how society might be inspired, via its artworks, to respond positively to eco-crisis and change itself accordingly, some eco-artists reflect on our human engagement with the natural world, and create ecologically informed art that focuses on (or helps us to visualise) eco-friendly transformation or reclamation. For instance, eco-art writer and theoretician Linda Weintraub (who coined the term \"cycle-logical\" to describe the correlation between recycling and psychology) reminds us that the 21st-century notion of artists' mindful engagement with their materials harkens back to Paleolithic midden piles of discarded pottery and metals from ancient civilizations. Weintraub cites the work of MacArthur Fellow Sarah Sze who recycles, reuses, and refurbishes detritus from the waste stream into elegant sprawling installations: this self-reflective work draws our attention to (and thereby initiates a critique of) our own cluttered lives and connection to consumer culture. A 2024 article by Bridie Lonie describes changes in approaches to environmental art from the 1970s to our present—including a discussion of the Anthropocene as an emergent, interdisciplinary concept, theorising artists’ engagement with the weather, theorising the role of the artwork within activism, “Interrupting the Automatism” in the activation of public space, and landscape as the provider of new eyes. \n\nThere are now countless other examples of eco-art globally that raise eco-awareness and establish new, precursor perceptual platforms that might contribute to societal or psychological change. Brigitte Hitschler 's Energy field , for instance, drew power for 400 red diodes from the to-be-reclaimed potash slag heap upon which they were installed, using art and science to reveal hidden material culture . [ better source needed ] Ecological artist and activist, Beverly Naidus , creates installations that address environmental crises, nuclear legacy issues, and creates works on paper that envision transformation. Her community-based permaculture project, Eden Reframed remediates degraded soil using phytoremediation and mushrooms resulting in a public place to grow and harvest medicinal plants and edible plants. Naidus is an educator having taught at the University of Washington, Tacoma for over ten years, where she created the Interdisciplinary Studio Arts in Community curriculum merging art with ecology and socially engaged practices. Naidus's book, Arts for Change: Teaching Outside the Frame is a resource for teachers, activists and artists. Sculptor and installation artist Erika Wanenmacher was inspired by Tony Price in her development of works addressing creativity, mythology, and New Mexico's nuclear presence. Oregon based artist and arborist Richard Reames uses grafting techniques to produce his works of arborsculpture and arbortecture. He uses time-based processes of multiple plantings of trees that are then shaped by bending, pruning, grafting, in ways that are similar to pleaching and espalier . These works have ecological advantages including carbon dioxide sequestration , habitat creation and climate change mitigation. \n\nRenewable energy sculpture is another recent development in environmental art. In response to the growing concern about global climate change, artists are designing explicit interventions at a functional level, merging aesthetical responses with the functional properties of energy generation or saving. Practitioners of this emerging area often work according to ecologically informed ethical and practical codes that conform to Ecodesign criteria. Andrea Polli Queensbridge Wind Power Project is an example of experimental architecture , incorporating wind turbines into a bridge's structure to recreate aspects of the original design as well as lighting the bridge and neighbouring areas. Ralf Sander's public sculpture , the World Saving Machine, used solar energy to create snow and ice outside the Seoul Museum of Art in the hot Korean summer. ",
  "The Berner Platte ( English : Bernese plate) is a traditional meat dish of Bernese cuisine in Switzerland . It consists of various meat and sausage varieties such as smoked pork and beef , pork belly , sausage, bacon and pork ears or tails cooked with juniper -flavored sauerkraut , and other foods such as potatoes and green and/or dried beans , which are served on a large plate. \n\nThe Berner Platte is not a stew; rather, the different meat ingredients and side dishes are each separately prepared or cooked. Berner Platte dishes are sometimes served within the context of a buffet . \n\nThe Berner Platte originated on March 5, 1798, when the Bernese defeated the French army at the Battle at Neuenegg [ de ] and returned as the victor. A victory celebration had to be organized in a very short time. For this purpose, the community contributed the best of their supplies. Due to the late winters, mainly durable or preserved foods were used, which were combined to create the well-known dish.",
  "Equal Vision Records is an independent record label based in Albany, New York . It was founded in the early 1990s by Ray Cappo , the singer for the punk bands Youth of Today , Shelter , and Better Than a Thousand .\n\nInitially, the label existed solely to distribute Shelter and other Krishna releases. In 1992, label manager Steve Reddy acquired Equal Vision from Cappo. The focus of the label expanded, bringing a wider variety of bands on board. According to Punk News , the mid-to-late '90s witnessed a renewed emphasis on hardcore efforts at Equal Vision, with notable signings such as One King Down and Ten Yard Fight . By the end of the '90s, Equal Vision Records (EVR) had built a stable of hardcore and punk bands, adding Bane , Trial , Converge , and Saves the Day to its roster in the latter part of the decade.\n\nIn July 2009, EVR established a sub-label named Mantralogy, which features bands that \"deliver edgy, Krishna -conscious music.\" \n\nIn 2012, EVR artist Max Bemis (of Say Anything ) created an imprint label named Rory Records , which is distributed by EVR. On June 19, it was announced that Equal Vision Records would form a partnership with Casey Crescenzo of the Dear Hunter , giving him his own imprint label: Cave & Canary Goods.\n\nEVR returned its distribution of physical and digital releases in the U.S. to RED Distribution as of January 23, 2012, after many years with Alternative Distribution Alliance . In May 2013, EVR inked a partnership with UNFD to manufacture, promote, and distribute EVR releases in Australia and New Zealand. Prior to this partnership, EVR had shared several artists with UNFD for distribution in both regions, including Say Anything , We Came as Romans , and House vs. Hurricane .\n\nVelocity Records was originally established in 2009 as a subsidiary of Rise Records . It was relaunched in 2016 as a partner of Equal Vision Records. ",
  "Kia ora ( Māori pronunciation: [ k i ˈ a ɔ ɾ a ] , approximated in English as / ˌ k iː ˈ ɔːr ə / kee OR -ə or / ˈ k j ɔːr ə / KYOR -ə ) is a Māori-language greeting which has entered New Zealand English . It translates literally as \"have life\" or \"be healthy\", wishing the essence of life upon someone, from one speaker to the other. It is used as an informal greeting or farewell equivalent to \" hi \", \" hello \", or \"goodbye\" and can be used as an expression of thanks similar to \" cheers \". As a greeting of local origin, it is comparable to the term \" g'day \" (used in Australian and New Zealand English). \n\nKia ora can be used to wish somebody life and health —the word ora used as a noun means \"life, health and vitality\". It might also be used as a salutation , a farewell or an expression of thanks. It also signifies agreement with a speaker at a meeting, being as it is from a culture that prizes oratory . It is widely used alongside other more formal Māori greetings. The Ministry for Culture and Heritage website NZHistory lists it as one of 100 Māori words every New Zealander should know, and lists the following definition: \"Hi!, G'day! (general informal greeting)\". \n\nKia ora can follow a similar pattern to address different specific numbers of people. By itself, it can be used to address any number of people, but by adding koe (i.e., kia ora koe ); kōrua ; and koutou one can specify a greeting to, respectively, a single; two; or three or more people. Similarly, by following with tātou , one addresses all the people present, including the speaker themselves. \n\nNew Zealand's national airline, Air New Zealand , uses Kia Ora as the name for its inflight magazine . Water Safety New Zealand, a water-safety advocacy organisation, has a specific Māori water safety programme, Kia Maanu Kia Ora , which makes use of the literal meaning of kia ora, as their message translates as stay afloat; stay alive . \n\nIn 1984, an Auckland telephone operator, Naida Glavish , was instructed to stop using kia ora when greeting callers after the post office had received a complaint. She refused to do so and was consequently demoted, with the whole affair attracting much public interest. She was later given back her original job. The Postmaster-General, Rob Talbot , convinced the then Prime Minister Robert Muldoon to overturn the prohibition on kia ora . \n\nKia ora has a similar meaning to the word kia orana , found in many related Polynesian languages such as Cook Islands Māori . ",
  "The mail or post is a system for physically transporting postcards , letters , and parcels . A postal service can be private or public, though many governments place restrictions on private systems. Since the mid-19th century, national postal systems have generally been established as a government monopoly , with a fee on the article prepaid. Proof of payment is usually in the form of an adhesive postage stamp , but a postage meter is also used for bulk mailing.\n\nPostal authorities often have functions aside from transporting letters. In some countries, a postal, telegraph and telephone (PTT) service oversees the postal system, in addition to telephone and telegraph systems. Some countries' postal systems allow for savings accounts and handle applications for passports .\n\nThe Universal Postal Union (UPU), established in 1874, includes 192 member countries and sets the rules for international mail exchanges as a Specialized Agency of the United Nations .\n\nThe word mail comes from the Middle English word male , referring to a travelling bag or pack. It was spelled in that manner until the 17th century and is distinct from the word male . The French have a similar word, malle , for a trunk or large box, and mála is the Irish term for a bag. In the 17th century, the word mail began to appear as a reference for a bag that contained letters: \"bag full of letter\" (1654). Over the next hundred years the word mail began to be applied strictly to the letters themselves and the sack as the mailbag . In the 19th century, the British typically used mail to refer to letters being sent abroad (i.e. on a ship) and post to refer to letters for domestic delivery. The word Post is derived from Old French poste , which ultimately stems from the past participle of the Latin verb ponere 'to lay down or place'. So in the U.K., the Royal Mail delivers the post , while in North America both the U.S. Postal Service and Canada Post deliver the mail .\n\nThe term email , short for \"electronic mail\", first appeared in the 1970s. The term snail mail is a retronym to distinguish it from the quicker email. Various dates have been given for its first use. \n\nThe practice of communication by written documents carried by an intermediary from one person or place to another almost certainly dates back nearly to the invention of writing . However, the development of formal postal systems occurred much later. The first documented use of an organized courier service for the dissemination of written documents is in Egypt , where Pharaohs used couriers to send out decrees throughout the territory of the state (2400 BCE). The earliest surviving piece of mail is also Egyptian, dating to 255 BCE. \n\nThe first credible claim for the development of a real postal system comes from Ancient Persia . The best-documented claim ( Xenophon ) attributes the invention to the ۸Persian King Cyrus the Great (550 BCE), who mandated that every province in his kingdom would organize reception and delivery of post to each of its citizens. Other writers credit his successor Darius I of Persia (521 BCE). Other sources claim much earlier dates for an Assyrian postal system, with credit given to Hammurabi (1700 BCE) and Sargon II (722 BCE). Mail may not have been the primary mission of this postal service, however. The role of the system as an intelligence gathering apparatus is well documented, and the service was (later) called angariae , a term that in time came to indicate a tax system. The Old Testament ( Esther , VIII) makes mention of this system: Ahasuerus , king of Persian , used couriers for communicating his decisions.\n\nThe Persian system worked using stations (called Chapar-Khaneh ), whence the message carrier (called Chapar ) would ride to the next post, whereupon he would swap his horse with a fresh one for maximum performance and delivery speed. Herodotus described the system in this way: \"It is said that as many days as there are in the whole journey, so many are the men and horses that stand along the road, each horse and man at the interval of a day's journey; and these are stayed neither by snow nor rain nor heat nor darkness from accomplishing their appointed course with all speed\". The verse prominently features on New York's James Farley Post Office , although it uses the translation \"Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night stays these couriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds\".\n\nThe economic growth and political stability under the Mauryan Empire (322–185 BCE) stimulated sustained development of civil infrastructure in ancient India . The Mauryans developed early Indian mail service as well as public wells, rest houses, and other facilities for the public. Common chariots called Dagana were sometimes used as mail chariots in ancient India. Couriers were used militarily by kings and local rulers to deliver information through runners and other carriers. The postmaster, the head of the intelligence service, was responsible for ensuring the maintenance of the courier system. Couriers were also used to deliver personal letters. \n\nIn South India , the Wodeyar dynasty (1399–1947) of the Kingdom of Mysore used mail service for espionage purposes thereby acquiring knowledge related to matters that took place at great distances. \n\nBy the end of the 18th century, a postal system in India was in operation. Later this system underwent complete modernization when the British Raj established its control over most of India. The Post Office Act XVII of 1837 provided that the Governor-General of India in Council had the exclusive right of conveying letters by post for hire within the territories of the East India Company. The mails were available to certain officials without charge, which became a controversial privilege as the years passed. On this basis the Indian Post Office was established on October 1, 1837. \n\nThe first well-documented postal service was that of Rome . Organized at the time of Augustus Caesar (62 BCE – 14 CE), the service was called cursus publicus and was provided with light carriages ( rhedæ ) pulled by fast horses. By the time of Diocletian , a parallel service was established with two-wheeled carts ( birotæ ) pulled by oxen . This service was reserved for government correspondence. Yet another service for citizens was later added. [ citation needed ] [ dubious – discuss ]\n\nIn 1802, the first Vietnamese postal service was established under the Nguyen dynasty , under the Ministry of Rites. During the Nguyen dynasty, official documents were transported by horse and other primitive means to stations built about 25-30 kilometers apart. In 1904, three wireless communication offices were established, and in early 1906 they were merged with the postal service to form the Post and Wireless Office. In 1945, after the August Revolution, the Post and Wireless Office was renamed the Post Office under the Ministry of Transportation. In 1955, the Post Office was upgraded to the Ministry of Post. \n\nSome Chinese sources claim mail or postal systems dating back to the Xia or Shang dynasties , which would be the oldest mailing service in the world. The earliest credible system of couriers was initiated by the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE), who had relay stations every 30 li (about 15 km) along major routes.\n\nThe Tang dynasty (618 to 907 AD) operated a recorded 1,639 posthouses, including maritime offices, employing around 20,000 people. The system was administered by the Ministry of War and private correspondence was forbidden from the network. The Ming dynasty (1368 to 1644) sought a postal system to deliver mail quickly, securely, and cheaply. Adequate speed was always a problem, because of the slow overland transportation system, and underfunding. Its network had 1,936 posthouses every 60 li along major routes, with fresh horses available every 10 li between them. The Qing operated 1,785 posthouses throughout their lands. More efficient, however, was the system linking the international settlements, centered around Shanghai and the Treaty ports. It was the main communication system for China's international trade. \n\nGenghis Khan installed an empire-wide messenger and postal station system named Örtöö within the Mongol Empire . During the Yuan dynasty under Kublai Khan , this system also covered the territory of China. Postal stations were used not only for the transmission and delivery of official mail but were also available for travelling officials, military men, and foreign dignitaries. These stations aided and facilitated the transport of foreign and domestic tribute specifically and the conduct of trade in general.\n\nBy the end of Kublai Khan's rule, there were more than 1400 postal stations in China alone, which in turn had at their disposal about 50,000 horses, 1,400 oxen, 6,700 mules, 400 carts, 6,000 boats, more than 200 dogs, and 1,150 sheep. \n\nThe stations were 25 to 65 km (16 to 40 mi) apart and had reliable attendants working for the mail service. Foreign observers, such as Marco Polo , have attested to the efficiency of this early postal system. \n\nEach station was maintained by up to twenty five families. Work for postal service counted as military service. The system was still operational in 18th century when 64 stations were required for a message to cross Mongolia from the Altai Mountains to China. \n\nThe modern Japanese system was developed in the mid-19th century, closely copying European models. Japan was highly innovative in developing the world's largest and most successful postal savings system and later a postal life insurance system as well. Postmasters play a key role in linking the Japanese political system to local politics. The postmasters are high prestige, and are often hereditary. To a large extent, the postal system generated the enormous funding necessary to rapidly industrialize Japan in the late 19th century. \n\nThe postal service was one of Korea's first attempts at modernization. The Joseon Post Office was established in 1884. \n\nAnother important postal service was created in the Islamic world by the caliph Mu'awiyya; the service was called barid , for the name of the towers built to protect the roads by which couriers travelled. \n\nBy 3000 BC, Egypt was using homing pigeons for pigeon post , taking advantage of a singular quality of this bird, which when taken far from its nest is able to find its way home due to a particularly developed sense of orientation. Messages were then tied around the legs of the pigeon, which was freed and could reach its original nest. By the 19th century, homing pigeons were used extensively for military communications. \n\nCharlemagne extended to the whole territory of his empire the system used by Franks in northern Gaul and connected this service with that of missi dominici . [ failed verification ]\n\nIn the mid-11th century, flax traders known as the Cairo Geniza Merchants from Fustat , Egypt wrote about using a postal service known as the kutubi. The kutubi system managed routes between the cities of Jerusalem, Ramla, Tyre, Ascalon, Damascus, Aleppo, and Fustat with year-round, regular mail delivery. \n\nMany religious orders had a private mail service. Notably, the Cistercians had one which connected more than 6,000 abbeys , monasteries , and churches. The best organization, however, was created by the Knights Templar . [ failed verification ]\n\nIn 1716, Correos y Telégrafos was established in Spain as public mail service, available to all citizens. Delivery postmen were first employed in 1756 and post boxes were installed firstly in 1762. \n\nIn 1505, Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I established a postal system in the Empire, appointing Franz von Taxis to run it. This system, originally the Kaiserliche Reichspost , is often considered the first modern postal service in the world, which initiated a revolution in communication in Europe. The system combined contemporary technical and organization means to create a stable transcontinental service which was also the first to offer (fee-based) public access. \n\nThe Thurn und Taxis family, then known as Tassis, had operated postal services between Italian city-states from 1290 onward.\n\nFor 500 years the postal business based in Brussels and in Frankfurt was passed from one generation to another. Following the abolition of the Empire in 1806, the Thurn-und-Taxis Post system continued as a private organization into the postage stamp era before being absorbed into the postal system of the new German Empire after 1871.\n\n1867 July 1 the State of Prussia had to make a compensation payment of 3.000.000 Thalers reinvested by Helene von Thurn & Taxis , daughter-in-law of the last postmaster, Maximilian Karl, 6th Prince of Thurn and Taxis , into real estate, most of it continuing to exist today.\nThe Phone Book of the World has its roots in the long history of the avant-garde telecommunications family Thurn & Taxis. [ unreliable source? ] The directory is the result of Johannes, 11th Prince of Thurn & Taxis transmitting PTT culture to a student and helping with the opening of a small Telephone Boutique next to a historic Postal mansion his ancestors used to go to centuries earlier. [ unreliable source? ]\n\nSeveral European Post Carriers like Deutsche Post or Austrian Post continue to use the Thurn & Taxis Post Horn in their company logo just like the global Phone Book of the World based in the old Postal mansion of King Louis XIV in Paris. [ unreliable source? ]\n\nIn the United Kingdom, prior to 1840 letters were paid for by the recipient and the cost was determined by the distance from sender to recipient and the number of sheets of paper rather than by a countrywide flat rate with weight restrictions. Sir Rowland Hill reformed the postal system based on the concepts of penny postage and prepayment. In his proposal, Hill also called for official pre-printed envelopes and adhesive postage stamps as alternative ways of getting the sender to pay for the postage, at a time when prepayment was optional, which led to the invention of the postage stamp, the Penny Black .\n\nThe postal system was important in the development of modern transportation. Railways carried railway post offices . During the 20th century, air mail became the transport of choice for inter-continental mail. Postmen started to use mail trucks . The handling of mail became increasingly automated.\n\nThe Internet came to change the conditions for physical mail. Email (and in recent years social networking sites) became a fierce competitor to physical mail systems, but online auctions and Internet shopping opened new business opportunities as people often get items bought online through the mail.\n\nModern mail is organized by national and privatized services, which are reciprocally connected by international regulations, organizations and international agreements. Paper letters and parcels can be sent to almost any country in the world relatively easily and cheaply. The Internet has made the process of sending letter-like messages nearly instantaneous, and in many cases and situations correspondents use email where they previously would have used letters. The volume of paper mail sent through the U.S. Postal Service has declined by more than 15% since its peak at 213 billion pieces per annum in 2006. \n\nSome countries have organized their mail services as public limited liability corporations without a legal monopoly .\n\nThe worldwide postal system constituting the individual national postal systems of the world's self-governing states is coordinated by the Universal Postal Union , which among other things sets international postage rates, defines standards for postage stamps and operates the system of international reply coupons .\n\nIn most countries a system of codes has been created (referred to as ZIP codes in the United States, postcodes in the United Kingdom and Australia, eircodes in Ireland and postal codes in most other countries) in order to facilitate the automation of operations. This also includes placing additional marks on the address portion of the letter or mailed object, called \"bar coding\". Bar coding of mail for delivery is usually expressed either by a series of vertical bars, usually called POSTNET coding or a block of dots as a two-dimensional barcode . The \"block of dots\" method allows for the encoding of proof of payment of postage, exact routing for delivery, and other features.\n\nThe ordinary mail service was improved in the 20th century with the use of planes for a quicker delivery. The world's first scheduled airmail post service took place in the United Kingdom between the London suburbs of Hendon and Windsor, Berkshire , on 9 September 1911. Some methods of airmail proved ineffective, however, including the United States Postal Service's experiment with rocket mail .\n\nReceipt services were made available in order to grant the sender a confirmation of effective delivery.\n\nBefore about the mid-nineteenth century, in regions where postal systems existed, the payment models varied, but most mail was sent unpaid requiring the recipient to pay the postage fee. In some regions a partial payment was made by the sender. Today, worldwide, the most common method of prepaying postage is by buying an adhesive postage stamp to be applied to the envelope before mailing; a much less common method is to use a postage-prepaid envelope . Franking is a method of creating postage-prepaid envelopes under licence using a special machine. They are used by companies with large mail programs, such as banks and direct mail companies.\n\nIn 1998, the U.S. Postal Service authorised the first tests of a secure system of sending digital franks via the Internet to be printed out on a PC printer, obviating the necessity to license a dedicated franking machine and allowing companies with smaller mail programs to make use of the option; this was later expanded to test the use of personalized postage. The service provided by the U.S. Postal Service in 2003 allows the franks to be printed out on special adhesive-backed labels.\n\nIn 2004 the Royal Mail in the United Kingdom introduced its SmartStamp Internet-based system, allowing printing on ordinary adhesive labels or envelopes. Similar systems are being considered by postal administrations around the world.\n\nWhen the pre-paid envelope or package is accepted into the mail by an agent of the postal service, the agent usually indicates by means of a cancellation that it is no longer valid for pre-payment of postage. The exceptions are when the agent forgets or neglects to cancel the mailpiece, for stamps that are pre-cancelled and thus do not require cancellation and for, in most cases, metered mail. (The \"personalized stamps\" authorized by the USPS and manufactured by Zazzle and other companies are in fact a form of meter label and thus do not need to be cancelled.)\n\nDocuments should generally not be read by anyone other than the addressee; for example, in the United States of America it is a violation of federal law for anyone other than the addressee and the government to open mail. There are exceptions however: executives often assign secretaries or assistants the task of handling their mail; and postcards do not require opening and can be read by anyone. For mail contained within an envelope, there are legal provisions in some jurisdictions allowing the recording of identities of sender and recipient. \n\nThe privacy of correspondence is guaranteed by the constitutions of Mexico , Colombia , Brazil and Venezuela , and is alluded to in the European Convention on Human Rights and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . The control of the contents inside private citizens' mail is censorship and concerns social, political, and legal aspects of civil rights . International mail and packages are subject to customs control, with the mail and packages often surveyed and their contents sometimes edited out (or even in). [ citation needed ]\n\nThere have been cases over the millennia of governments opening and copying or photographing the contents of private mail. Subject to the laws in the relevant jurisdiction, correspondence may be openly or covertly opened, or the contents determined via some other method, by the police or other authorities in some cases relating to a suspected criminal conspiracy, although black chambers (largely in the past, though there is apparently some continuance of their use today) opened extralegally.\n\nThe mail service may be allowed to open the mail if neither addressee nor sender can be located, in order to attempt to locate either. Mail service may also open the mail to inspect if it contains materials that are hazardous to transport or violate local laws.\n\nWhile in most cases mail censorship is exceptional, military mail to and from soldiers is often subject to surveillance. The mail is censored to prevent leaking tactical secrets, such as troop movements or weather conditions. Depending on the country, civilian mail containing military secrets can also be monitored and censored. \n\nMail sent to and from inmates in jails or prisons within the United States is subject to opening and review by jail or prison staff to determine if the mail has any criminal action dictated or provides means for an escape. The only mail that is not able to be read is attorney-client mail, which is covered under the attorney-client confidentiality laws in the United States. \n\nModern alternatives, such as the telegraph , telephone , telex , facsimile , and email , have reduced the attractiveness of paper mail for many applications. These modern alternatives have some advantages: in addition to their speed, they may be more secure, e.g., because the general public cannot learn the address of the sender or recipient from the envelope, and occasionally traditional items of mail may fail to arrive, e.g. due to vandalism to mailboxes, unfriendly pets, and adverse weather conditions. Mail carriers due to perceived hazards or inconveniences, may refuse, officially or otherwise, to deliver mail to a particular address (for instance, if there is no clear path to the door or mailbox). On the other hand, traditional mail avoids the possibility of computer malfunctions and malware , and the recipient does not need to print it out if they wish to have a paper copy, though scanning is required to make a digital copy.\n\nPhysical mail is still widely used in business and personal communications for such reasons as legal requirements for signatures , requirements of etiquette, and the requirement to enclose small physical objects.\n\nSince the advent of email , which is almost always much faster, the postal system has come to be referred to in Internet slang by the retronym \" snail mail \". Occasionally, the term \"white mail\" has also been used as a neutral term for postal mail.\n\nMainly during the 20th century, experimentation with hybrid mail has combined electronic and paper delivery. Electronic mechanisms include telegram , telex , facsimile ( fax ), email , and short message service ( SMS ). There have been methods which have combined mail and some of these newer methods, such as temporary emails, that combine facsimile transmission with overnight delivery. These vehicles commonly use a mechanical or electro-mechanical standardised writing (typing), that on the one hand makes for more efficient communication, while on the other hand makes impossible characteristics and practices that traditionally were in conventional mail, such as calligraphy .\n\nThis epoch [ when? ] is undoubtedly mainly dominated by mechanical writing, with a general use of no more of half a dozen standard typographic fonts from standard keyboards. However, the increased use of typewritten or computer-printed letters for personal communication and the advent of email have sparked renewed interest in calligraphy, as a letter has become more of a \"special event\". Long before email and computer-printed letters, however, decorated envelopes, rubber stamps and artistamps formed part of the medium of mail art . \n\nIn the 2000s (decade) with the advent of eBay and other online auction sites and online stores , postal services in industrialized nations have seen a major shift to item shipping. This has been seen as a boost to the system's usage in the wake of lower paper mail volume due to the accessibility of email.\n\nOnline post offices have emerged to give recipients a means of receiving traditional correspondence mail in a scanned electronic format.\n\nPostage stamps are also object of a particular form of collecting . Stamp collecting has been a very popular hobby . In some cases, when demand greatly exceeds supply, their commercial value on this specific market may become enormously greater than face value, even after use. For some postal services the sale of stamps to collectors who will never use them is a significant source of revenue; for example, stamps from Tokelau, South Georgia & South Sandwich Islands, Tristan da Cunha, Niuafoʻou and many others. Stamp collecting is commonly known as philately , although strictly the latter term refers to the study of stamps.\n\nAnother form of collecting regards postcards , a document written on a single robust sheet of paper, usually decorated with photographic pictures or artistic drawings on one of the sides, and short messages on a small part of the other side, that also contained the space for the address. In strict philatelic usage, the postcard is to be distinguished from the postal card , which has a pre-printed postage on the card. The fact that this communication is visible by other than the receiver often causes the messages to be written in jargon .\n\nLetters are often studied as an example of literature, and also in biography in the case of a famous person. A portion of the New Testament of the Bible is composed of the Apostle Paul 's epistles to Christian congregations in various parts of the Roman Empire. See below for a list of famous letters.\n\nA style of writing, called epistolary , tells a fictional story in the form of the correspondence between two or more characters.\n\nA makeshift mail method after stranding on a deserted island is a message in a bottle .\n\nNumerous countries, including Sweden (1 January 1993), New Zealand (1998 and 2003), Germany (2005 and 2007), Argentina and Chile opened up the postal services market to new entrants. In the case of New Zealand Post Limited , this included (from 2003) its right to be the sole New Zealand postal administration member of the Universal Postal Union , thus the ending of its monopoly on stamps bearing the name New Zealand.\n\nLetter-sized mail constitutes the bulk of the contents sent through most postal services. These are usually documents printed on A4 (210×297 mm), Letter-sized (8.5×11 inches), or smaller paper and placed in envelopes.\n\nHandwritten correspondence, while once a major means of communications between distant people, is now used less frequently due to the advent of more immediate forms of communication, such as the telephone or email. Traditional letters, however, are often considered to hark back to a \"simpler time\" and are still used when someone wishes to be deliberate and thoughtful about their communication. An example would be a letter of sympathy to a bereaved person.\n\nBills and invoices are often sent through the mail, like regular billing correspondence from utility companies and other service providers. These letters often contain a self-addressed envelope that allows the receiver to remit payment back to the company easily. While still very common, many people now opt to use online bill payment services, which eliminate the need to receive bills through the mail. Paperwork for the confirmation of large financial transactions is often sent through the mail. Many tax documents are as well.\n\nNew credit cards and their corresponding personal identification numbers are sent to their owners through the mail. The card and number are usually mailed separately several days or weeks apart for security reasons.\n\nBulk mail is mail that is prepared for bulk mailing, often by presorting , and processing at reduced rates. It is often used in direct marketing and other advertising mail , although it has other uses as well. The senders of these messages sometimes purchase lists of addresses (which are sometimes targeted towards certain demographics ) and then send letters advertising their product or service to all recipients. Other times, commercial solicitations are sent by local companies advertising local products, like a restaurant delivery service advertising to their delivery area or a retail store sending their weekly advertising circular to a general area. Bulk mail is also often sent to companies' existing subscriber bases, advertising new products or services.\n\nFirst-Class Mail in the U.S. includes postcards, letters, large envelopes (flats), and small packages, providing each piece weighs 13 ounces (370 g) or less. Delivery is given priority over second-class ( newspapers and magazines ), third class (bulk advertisements), and fourth-class mail (books and media packages). First-Class Mail prices are based on both the shape and weight of the item being mailed. Pieces over 13 ounces can be sent as Priority Mail. As of 2011 42% of First-Class Mail arrived the next day, 27% in two days, and 31% in three. The USPS expected that changes to the service in 2012 would cause about 51% to arrive in two days and most of the rest in three. The Canada Post counterpart is Lettermail. \n\nThe British Royal Mail's 1st Class, as it is styled, is simply a priority option over 2nd Class, at a slightly higher cost. Royal Mail aims (but does not guarantee) to deliver all 1st Class letters the day after posting. \n\nIn Austria priority delivery mail is called Prio, in Switzerland A-Post. \n\nRegistered mail allows the location and in particular the correct delivery of a letter to be tracked. It is usually considerably more expensive than regular mail, and is typically used for valuable items. Registered mail is constantly tracked through the system.\n\nRecorded mail is handled just like ordinary mail with the exception that it has to be signed for on receipt. This is useful for legal documents where proof of delivery is required.\n\nIn the United Kingdom recorded delivery mail (branded as signed for by the Royal Mail) is covered by The Recorded Delivery Services Act 1962 . Under this legislation any document which its relevant law requires service by registered post can also be lawfully served by recorded delivery.\n\nThe United States Postal Service introduced a test allowing \"repositionable notes\" (for example, 3M's Post-it notes ) to be attached to the outside of envelopes and bulk mailings, afterwards extending the test for an unspecified period. The repositionable note may be fixed directly to the address side of First-Class Mail and Standard Mail letter-size mailpieces. These mailpieces must meet the standards in 7.2 through 7.6. The note is included as an integral part of the mailpiece for weight and postage rate and must be accounted for in pricing.\n\nPostal cards and postcards are small message cards that are sent by mail unenveloped; the distinction often, though not invariably and reliably, drawn between them is that \"postal cards\" are issued by the postal authority or entity with the \"postal indicia\" (or \"stamp\") preprinted on them, while postcards are privately issued and require affixing an adhesive stamp (though there have been some cases of a postal authority's issuing non-stamped postcards). Postcards are often printed to promote tourism, with pictures of resorts, tourist attractions or humorous messages on the front and allowing for a short message from the sender to be written on the back. The postage required for postcards is generally less than postage required for standard letters; however, certain technicalities such as their being oversized or having cut-outs, may result in payment of the first-class rate being required.\n\nPostcards are also used by magazines for new subscriptions. Inside many magazines are postage-paid subscription cards that a reader can fill out and mail back to the publishing company to be billed for a subscription to the magazine. In this fashion, magazines also use postcards for other purposes, including reader surveys, contests or information requests.\n\nPostcards are sometimes sent by charities to their members with a message to be signed and sent to a politician (e.g. to promote fair trade or third world debt cancellation).\n\nSmall packets are usually less than 2 kg (4 lb).\n\nLarger envelopes are also sent through the mail. These are often composed of a stronger material than standard envelopes and are often used by businesses to transport documents that may not be folded or damaged, such as legal documents and contracts. Due to their size, larger envelopes are sometimes charged additional postage.\n\nPackages are often sent through some postal services, usually requiring additional postage than an average letter or postcard. Many postal services have limitations as to what a package may or may not contain, usually placing limits or bans on perishable, hazardous or flammable materials. Some hazardous materials in limited quantities may be shipped with appropriate markings and packaging, like an ORM-D label. Additionally, as a result of terrorism concerns, the U.S. Postal Service subjects their packages to numerous security tests, often scanning or x-raying packages for materials that might be found in biological materials or mail bombs .\n\nNewspapers and magazines are also sent through postal services. Many magazines are simply deposited in the mail like any other mailpiece. In the U.S., they are printed with a special Intelligent Mail barcode that acts as prepaid postage. Other magazines are now shipped in shrinkwrap to protect loose contents such as blow-in cards . During the second half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, newspapers and magazines were normally posted using wrappers with a stamp imprint.\n\nHybrid mail , sometimes referred to as L-mail , is the electronic lodgement of mail from the mail generator's computer directly to a Postal Service provider. The Postal Service provider is then able to use electronic means to have the mail piece sorted, routed and physically produced at a site closest to the delivery point. It is a type of mail growing in popularity with some Post Office operations and individual businesses venturing into this market. In some countries, these services are available to print and deliver emails to those who are unable to receive email , such as the elderly or infirm. Services provided by Hybrid mail providers are closely related to that of mail forwarding service providers.\n\nThe business model of modern postal operators can be broken down to four stages: (1) collection, (2) sorting, (3) transportation, and (4) delivery. \n\nCollection is the gathering of mailpieces from various locations such as customer premises, post boxes , and post offices. Newly collected mail is normally not sorted immediately upon receipt and is instead taken directly in its unsorted state to sorting centers. \n\nSorting is the process of segregating mailpieces into groups based on their type and destination, so that they can be loaded onto an appropriate mode of transportation headed in the general direction of their final destinations. Traditionally, mail was manually sorted by hand, but it is increasingly sorted by automatic sorting machines. The main dilemma faced by postal operators when organizing the sorting stage is whether to have a smaller number of large, centralized sorting centers (a spoke–hub distribution paradigm ) or a larger number of smaller sorting centers along with a larger number of direct connections between all of them ( point-to-point transit ). \n\nTransportation is the process of carrying mail from one place to another. A mailpiece usually has to be transported from one sorting center to another sorting center, where it is often sorted to another transportation segment headed towards its destination address, until it reaches the sorting center that directly serves that address. \n\nDelivery is the process of carrying mail to final destinations such as letter boxes . Sorting centers sort mailpieces destined for addresses in their immediate vicinity to carriers serving those addresses. Transporting mail to final destinations (the so-called last mile problem) is the most labor-intensive stage and accounts for up to 50% of postal operators' expenses. Depending upon the final destination, carriers often use vehicles, their own feet, or a combination of both. Postal operators try to control costs by presorting mail for carriers, so that they receive mail already arranged in the correct sequence for their designated routes; reducing the frequency of deliveries; or retiming deliveries so that they are spread throughout the day. \n\nComponents of a postal system:",
  "The Lumière Festival ( French : Festival Lumière ), also called the Grand Lyon Film Festival , is an annual film festival held each October in Metropolis of Lyon , France , since 2009. The festival is named in honor of the Lumière brothers , who invented the Cinématographe motion picture system in 1895, and is organized by the Institut Lumière .\n\nThe festival focuses on the history of cinema with the line-up dedicated to the works of the past through restored prints, retrospectives and tributes. The Lumière Award ( Prix Lumière ), an award that recognizes the achievement and contributions of an international film personality, is also presented annually at the festival. \n\nThis article about a European film festival is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Wichterle & Kovářik was a Czechoslovakian machinery manufacturer based in Prostějov. They produced cars and trucks from 1925 to 1937. \n\nFrantišek Wichterle founded a small factory in Prostějov, 1878 where he built agricultural vehicles. Dr František Kovařík owned a similar company in the same town who produced similar machinery. On 22 December 1918, the two companies merged into a joint-stock company Wichterle & Kovářik Ltd. After experimenting with different prototypes, including buying a chassis from Italian engineering company Ansaldo , mass production did not begin until 1925 (or 1927 according to some sources) with the model 7/28. Production of the cars were discontinued in 1937 and continued producing small trucks until 1940 after the German occupation of Czechoslovakia during World War 2 . \n\nThe first vehicle that was built under license of Ansaldo , only five prototypes were made from 1922. They had a four-cylinder four-stroke engine with a 1000 cc displacement but later increased to 1250 cc and then 1350 cc. They later experiment making a more powerful and better-equipped car with displacement of up to 1500 cc. From 1924 and spring of 1925, around 5 4/16 hp (1250 cc) prototypes were developed and produced. By the end of 1925, 15 5/20 hp (1350 cc) prototypes were produced. \n\nThe first mass-production model. Produced from 1925 (or 1927) to 1932 with 280 examples built. Powered by a 1478 cc four-cylinder engine offering 28 hp or 40 hp. The engine had hardened cylinder barrels, silumin engine block, 12 V battery ignition and dry disc clutch. It had a top speed of 44 mph. During its production, several body types were offered, including an open tourer, faux cabriolet and limousine. They also made a two-seater sport model called the 7/28 Sport. \n\nBuilt from 1930 to 1935, 150 examples were built. The 1743 cc four-cylinder engine produced 35 hp. It was offered in a four-seater phaeton, four- or six-seater limousine, open tourer, cabriolet or a landaulet body. \n\nIn 1931, they experimented with streamlining by fitting an aerodynamic body on a Type 35 chassis. Mass production were planned but setbacks caused it to never happen. Despite being well received by the press, the public wasn't ready for it. It was also expensive to produce and the performance and fuel consumption was lacklustre. Only 6 examples were made. \n\nThe Model 40 was Wikov's most successful model. From 1933 to 1935, 330 examples were produced. The 1942 cc four-cylinder engine produced 43 hp. It had a choice of two bodies, a four- or six-seater saloon.\n\nIn 1934, Czech racer, Adolf Szczyzycki won the 1000 mil československých (1000 Miles of Czechoslovakia) in the 2000 cc class using a Wikov 40. \n\nThe Model 70 was the largest model. Only four prototypes were produced from 1933 to 1935. It combined two four-cylinder engines borrowed from the Model 35 which resulted in a 3486 cc eight-cylinder engine producing 70 hp. ",
  "Starchitect is a portmanteau used to describe architects whose celebrity and critical acclaim have transformed them into stars of the architecture world and may even have given them some degree of fame among the general public. Celebrity status is generally associated with avant-gardist novelty. Developers around the world have proven eager to sign up \"top talent\" (i.e., starchitects) in hopes of convincing reluctant municipalities to approve large developments, of obtaining financing or of increasing the value of their buildings. A key characteristic is that the starchitecture is almost always \"iconic\" and highly visible within the site or context. As the status is dependent on current visibility in the media, fading media status implies that architects lose \"starchitect\" status—hence a list can be drawn up of former \"starchitects\".\n\nBuildings are frequently regarded as profit opportunities, so creating \" scarcity \" or a certain degree of uniqueness gives further value to the investment. The balance between functionality and avant-gardism has influenced many property developers . For instance, architect-developer John Portman found that building skyscraper hotels with vast atriums —which he did in various U.S. cities during the 1980s—was more profitable than maximizing floor area. \n\nHowever, it was the rise of postmodern architecture during the late 1970s and early 1980s that gave rise to the idea that star status in the architectural profession was about an avant-gardism linked to popular culture —which, it was argued by postmodern critics such as Charles Jencks , had been derided by the guardians of a modernist architecture . In response, Jencks argued for \" double coding \"; i.e., that postmodernism could be understood and enjoyed by the general public and yet command \"critical approval\". The star architects from that period often built little or their best-known works were \"paper architecture\"—unbuilt or even unbuildable schemes, yet known through frequent reproduction in architectural magazines, such as the work of Léon Krier , Michael Graves , Aldo Rossi , Robert A. M. Stern , Hans Hollein , and James Stirling . As postmodernism went into decline, its avant-gardist credentials suffered due to its associations with vernacular and traditionalism, and celebrity shifted back towards modernist avant-gardism. \n\nBut a high-tech strand of modernism persisted in parallel with a formally retrogressive post-modernism; one that often championed \"progress\" by celebrating, if not exposing, structure and systems engineering. Such technological virtuosity can be discovered during this time in the work of Norman Foster , Renzo Piano , and Richard Rogers , the latter two having designed the controversial Pompidou Centre (1977) in Paris , which opened to international acclaim. What this so‑called high-tech architecture showed was that an industrial aesthetic—an architecture characterized as much by urban grittiness as engineering efficiency—had popular appeal. This was also somewhat evident in so‑called deconstructionist architecture , such as the employment of chainlink fencing , raw plywood and other industrial materials in designs for residential and commercial architecture. Arguably the most notable practitioner along these lines, at least in the 1970s, is the now internationally renowned architect Frank Gehry , whose house in Santa Monica, California bears these characteristics.\n\nWith urban generation from the turn of the twentieth century picking up, economists forecast that globalization and the powers of multinational corporations would shift the balance of power away from nation states towards individual cities , which would then compete with neighboring cities and cities elsewhere for the most lucrative modern industries, and which increasingly in major Western Europe and U.S. cities did not include manufacturing. Thus cities set about \"reinventing themselves\", giving precedence to the value given by culture. Municipalities and non-profit organizations hope the use of a starchitect will drive traffic and tourist income to their new facilities. With the popular and critical success of the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao , Spain , by Frank Gehry , in which a rundown area of a city in economic decline brought in huge financial growth and prestige , the media started to talk about the so-called 'Bilbao effect'; a star architect designing a blue-chip, prestige building was thought to make all the difference in producing a landmark for the city. Similar examples are the Imperial War Museum North (2002), Greater Manchester , UK, by Daniel Libeskind , the Kiasma Museum of Contemporary Art, Helsinki , Finland , by Steven Holl , and the Seattle Central Library (2004), Washington state, United States, by OMA .\n\nThe origin of the phrase \"wow factor architecture\" is uncertain, but has been used extensively in business management in both the UK and United States to promote avant-gardist buildings within urban regeneration since the late 1990s. It has even taken on a more scientific aspect, with money made available in the UK to study the significance of the factor. In research carried out in Sussex University , UK, in 2000, interested parties were asked to consider the \"effect on the mind and the senses\" of new developments. In an attempt to produce a \"delight rating\" for a given building, architects, clients and the intended users of the building were encouraged to ask: \"What do passers‑by think of the building?\", \"Does it provide a focal point for the community?\" The Design Quality Indicator has been produced by the UK Construction Industry Council , so that bodies commissioning new buildings will be encouraged to consider whether the planned building has \"the wow factor\" in addition to more traditional concerns of function and cost.\n\nThe \"wow factor\" has also been taken up by Spanish architecture critics such as New York Times architecture critics Herbert Mushamp and Nicolai Ouroussof, in their arguments that the city needs to be \"radically\" reshaped by new towers. Discussing Spanish starchitect Santiago Calatrava 's new skyscraper at 80 South Street near the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge , Ouroussof mentions how Calatrava's apartments are conceived as self-contained urban refuges, $30,000,000 prestige objects for the global elites : \"If they differ in spirit from the Vanderbilt mansions of the past, it is only in that they promise to be more conspicuous. They are paradises for aesthetes.\" \n\nThe notion of giving celebrity status to architects is not new, but is contained within the general tendency, from the Renaissance onwards, to give status to artists. Until the modern era, artists in Western civilization were generally working under a patron – usually the Church or the rulers of the state – and their reputation could become commodified, such that their services could be bought by different patrons. One of the first records of celebrity status is artist-architect Giorgio Vasari 's monograph Le vite de' più eccellenti pittori, scultori e architettori (in English, Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects ), first published in 1550, recording the Italian Renaissance at the time of its flourishment. Vasari, himself under the patronage of Grand Duke Cosimo I de' Medici , even favoured architects from the city where he resided, Florence , attributing to them innovation, while barely mentioning other cities or places further away. The importance of Vasari's book was in the ability to consolidate reputation and status without people actually having to see the works described. The development of media has thus been equally of central importance to architectural celebrity as other walks of life.\n\nWhile status arising from patronage from the Church and State continued with the rise of Enlightenment and capitalism (e.g., the position of architect Christopher Wren in the patronage of the British Crown , the City of London , the Church of England and Oxford University during the 17th century), there was an expansion in artistic and architectural services available, each competing for commissions with the growth of industry and the middle-classes . Architects nevertheless remained essentially servants to their clients: while Romanticism and Modernism in the other arts encouraged individualism , progress in architecture was geared mostly to improvements in building performance (standards of comfort), engineering and the development of new building typologies (e.g., factories, railway stations , and later airports ) and public benevolence (the problems of urbanization, public housing , overcrowding, etc.), yet allowing some architects to concern themselves with architecture as an autonomous art (as flourished with Art Nouveau and Art Deco ). The heroes of modern architecture, in particular Le Corbusier , were seen as heroic for generating theories about how architecture should be concerned with the development of society. [ citation needed ]\n\nSuch publicity also made it into the popular press: in the post-war era Time magazine occasionally featured architects on its front cover – for instance, in addition to Le Corbusier, Eero Saarinen , Frank Lloyd Wright , and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe . In more recent times Time magazine has also featured Philip Johnson , Peter Eisenman , Rem Koolhaas and Zaha Hadid . Eero Saarinen specialized in building headquarters for prestigious U.S. companies, such as General Motors , CBS , and IBM , and these companies used architecture to promote their corporate images: e.g., during the 1950s General Motors often photographed their new car models in front of their headquarters in Michigan . Corporations have continued to understand the value of bringing in starchitects to design their key buildings. For instance, the manufacturing company Vitra is well known for the works of notable architects that make up its premises in Weil am Rhein , Germany; including Zaha Hadid, Tadao Ando , SANAA , Herzog & de Meuron , Álvaro Siza , and Frank Gehry ; as is the fashion house Prada for commissioning Rem Koolhaas to design their flagship stores in New York and Los Angeles . However, throughout history the greatest prestige has come with the design of public buildings – opera houses, libraries, townhalls, and especially museums, often referred to as the \"new cathedrals\" of our times. \n\nObjectivity in the question of status would seem questionable. However, researchers at Clarkson University have used the method of Google hits to 'measure' the degree of celebrity status: \"to establish a precise mathematical definition of fame, both in the sciences and the world at large\". \n\nAlthough there are few architects well known to the general public, \"starchitects\" are held in the highest esteem by their professional colleagues and the professional media. Such status is marked not only by prestigious commissions but also by various prizes. For example, the Pritzker Prize , awarded since 1979, attempts to increase its own prestige by mentioning how its procedures are modeled on the Nobel Prize . \n\nIn his 1979 book Architecture and its Interpretation , Juan Pablo Bonta put forward a theory about how buildings and architects achieve canonic status. He argued that a building and its architect achieve iconic or canonic status after a period when various critics and historians build up an interpretation that then becomes unquestioned for a significant period. If the text itself receives canonical status, then the status of the architect is further endorsed. For example, in the first edition of Siegfried Giedion 's book Space Time and Architecture (1949) the Finnish architect Alvar Aalto was not mentioned at all. In the second edition he received more attention than any other architect, including Le Corbusier , who until then had been understood as the most important modernist architect.\n\nHowever, there is a difference between canonic status and \"starchitect\": as part of the \"wow-factor\" aspect of the term depends on current media visibility, it is used only to describe currently practicing architects:\n\nTracking Turkey’s First Starchitect",
  "Fried eggplant , or fried aubergine, is featured in dishes of many different cuisines.\n\nIn Spanish cuisine , this dish takes the form of a tapa . In the province of Córdoba it is usually made with honey. \n\nFried eggplant ( Turkish : Patlıcan kızartma or Patlıcan kızartması ) is found in Turkish cuisine . It is such a common dish during summer months that this season used to be called patlıcan kızartma ayları (fried eggplant months) in Ottoman Istanbul , where this generalized frying caused huge fires and destroyed entire mahalles due to the abundance of old wooden houses. The dish is usually eaten with a garlic yogurt or tomato sauce .\n\nIn Southern Italy , especially in Campania region, eggplants are cut into little pieces and therefore fried. Melanzane a funghetto have two variants, the one with tomatoes and the other without. Another recipe which contains fried eggplants is parmigiana di melanzane , famous in all southern regions of the country.\n\nIn Arab and Israeli cuisines , fried eggplant is typically served with tahini . In Israel, it is used to make sabich , a popular sandwich of fried eggplant and hard-boiled egg in a pita . \n\nIn India, fried eggplant is also known as brinjal phodi or vangyache kaap in the Konkani language . Made with shallow-fried eggplant slices, this recipe is typically a Konkani and Maharashtrian dish, very similar to begun bhaja from Bengali cuisine . ",
  "Double steaming , sometimes called double boiling , is a Chinese cooking technique to prepare delicate food such as bird's nest soup and shark fin soup . The food is covered with water and put in a covered ceramic jar and the jar is then steamed for several hours. This technique ensures there is no loss of liquid or moisture (its essences) from the food being cooked, hence it is often used with expensive ingredients like Chinese herbal medicines. \n\nIn Cantonese , double steaming is called dun ( simplified Chinese : 炖 ; traditional Chinese : 燉 ; pinyin : dùn ). The meaning of the Chinese character for dun in Cantonese is different from that in Mandarin, because dun means to simmer or stew in Mandarin. This technique is also common in Fujian , a neighbouring province of Guangdong (Canton).\n\nTong sui , or dessert soups, which contain medicinal herbs can be cooked using double steaming. \n\nCantonese cuisine is famous for its slow-cooked soup. One famous dish of this kind is called the winter melon urn ( 冬瓜盅 ). It is prepared by emptying the inside of a winter melon to make an urn. The outside of the winter melon is often carved with artistic patterns. The inside is then filled with soup ingredients, such as Chinese cured ham, and Chinese herbs. The whole urn, complete with its original melon lid, is double-steamed for at least four hours. The flavour of the soup is soaked into the flesh of the melon. The whole melon and its contents are brought to the dinner table. The soup is served by scooping out the liquid and the inside wall of the melon. In this case, the edible melon takes the place of the double steaming jar. This application is possible because winter melon has a waxy, and thus waterproof, rind. Winter melon is believed to be nourishing and it is seldom cooked with ingredients that are believed to be too yin or too yang .\n\nA dessert dish called double-steamed frog ovaries in a coconut (椰青燉雪蛤膏) is traditionally prepared for women. Chinese medicinal ingredients (including hasma ), spices, and rock sugar, are placed inside a young coconut to soak in the original coconut juice. The filled coconut is then double-steamed for several hours. The whole coconut is served whole at the table after dinner. The contents and the inside wall of the coconut are scooped out to be consumed.",
  "Children's manga ( Japanese : 子供向け漫画 , Hepburn : kodomo-muke manga ) and children's anime ( 子供向けアニメ , kodomo-muke anime ) refer to manga and anime directed towards children . These series are usually moralistic, often educating children about staying in the right path in life. Each chapter is usually a self-contained story\n\nManga aimed at children started in the late 19th century with the production of short manga, approximately 15 pages long, printed in magazines. These short manga were created as a part of the Meiji era's attempt to encourage literacy among Japanese youth. A major milestone in the popularity of anime was the creation of Astro Boy by Osamu Tezuka , who is often considered the father of anime. \n\nChildren's anime and manga can be divided into four categories. The first category consists of anime and manga adaptations of Western stories, such as World Masterpiece Theater . Most of them are TV series. Despite being popular, they are less representative of traditional Japanese anime. Instead, they are modeled after classical American or Soviet cartoons. The second category consists of adaptations of Japanese media and original works. They use linguistic gags, contain references to Japanese society , and may be harder to understand for non-Japanese audiences. They are in some ways similar to American animation . An example is Doraemon .\n\nThe third category, known as joji-muke ( 女児向け ) , consists of manga and anime aimed towards young girls, such as Hello Kitty . The fourth category, which is closer to shōnen , has connections with popular video game and toy franchises, and has the greatest commercial success. Manga magazines such as CoroCoro Comic and Comic BomBom primarily target young boys, especially those in elementary school, though some, such as Pucchigumi , target young girls. Popular children's manga is often adapted into anime and accompanied by a plethora of merchandise.\n\nThe annual Shogakukan Manga Award and Kodansha Manga Award each include a category for children's manga. The former first included a category for children's manga in 1981.",
  "Parallax scrolling is a technique in computer graphics where background images move past the camera more slowly than foreground images, creating an illusion of depth in a 2D scene of distance. The technique grew out of the multiplane camera technique used in traditional animation since the 1930s.\n\nParallax scrolling was popularized in 2D computer graphics with its introduction to video games in the early 1980s. Some parallax scrolling was used in the arcade video game Jump Bug (1981). It used a limited form of parallax scrolling with the main scene scrolling while the starry night sky is fixed and clouds move slowly, adding depth to the scenery. The following year, Moon Patrol (1982) implemented a full form of parallax scrolling, with three separate background layers scrolling at different speeds, simulating the distance between them. Moon Patrol is often credited with popularizing parallax scrolling. Jungle King (1982), later called Jungle Hunt , also had parallax scrolling, and was released a month after Moon Patrol in June 1982. \n\nThere are four main methods of parallax scrolling used in titles for arcade system board , video game console and personal computer systems. [ citation needed ]\n\nSome display systems support multiple background layers that can be scrolled independently in horizontal and vertical directions and composited on one another, simulating a multiplane camera . On such a display system, a game can produce parallax by simply changing each layer's position by a different amount in the same direction. Layers that move more quickly are perceived to be closer to the virtual camera. Layers can be placed in front of the playfield —the layer containing the objects with which the player interacts—for various reasons such as to provide increased dimension, obscure some of the action of the game, or distract the player.\n\nProgrammers may also make pseudo-layers of sprites —individually controllable moving objects drawn by hardware on top of or behind the layers—if they are available on the display system. For instance Star Force , an overhead-view vertically scrolling shooter for NES , used this for its starfield, and Final Fight for the Super NES used this technique for the layer immediately in front of the main playfield.\n\nThe Amiga computer has sprites which can have any height and can be set horizontal with the copper co-processor, which makes them ideal for this purpose.\n\nRisky Woods on the Amiga uses sprites multiplexed with the copper to create an entire fullscreen parallax background layer as an alternative to the system's dual playfield mode.\n\nScrolling displays built up of individual tiles can be made to 'float' over a repeating background layer by animating the individual tiles' bitmaps in order to portray the parallax effect. Color cycling can be used to animate tiles quickly on the whole screen. This software effect gives the illusion of another (hardware) layer. Many games used this technique for a scrolling star-field, but sometimes a more intricate or multi-directional effect is achieved, such as in the game Parallax by Sensible Software .\n\nIn raster graphics , the lines of pixels in an image are typically composited and refreshed in top-to-bottom order with a slight delay (called the horizontal blanking interval ) between drawing one line and drawing the next line.\nGames designed for older graphical chipsets—such as those of the third and fourth generations of video game consoles, those of dedicated TV games , or those of similar handheld systems—take advantage of the raster characteristics to create the illusion of more layers.\n\nSome display systems have only one layer. These include most of the classic 8-bit systems (such as the Commodore 64 , Nintendo Entertainment System , Master System , PC Engine/TurboGrafx-16 and original Game Boy ). The more sophisticated games on such systems generally divide the layer into horizontal strips, each with a different position and rate of scrolling. Typically, strips higher on the screen will represent things farther away from the virtual camera or one strip will be held stationary to display status information. The program will then wait for horizontal blank and change the layer's scroll position just before the display system begins to draw each scanline. This is called a \"raster effect\" and is also useful for changing the system palette to provide a gradient background.\n\nSome platforms (such as the Commodore 64, Amiga , Master System, PC Engine/TurboGrafx-16, Sega Mega Drive/Genesis , Super NES , Game Boy , Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS ) provide a horizontal blank interrupt for automatically setting the registers independently of the rest of the program. Others, such as the NES, require the use of cycle-timed code, which is specially written to take exactly as long to execute as the video chip takes to draw one scanline, or timers inside game cartridges that generate interrupts after a given number of scanlines have been drawn. Many NES games use this technique to draw their status bars, and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles II: The Arcade Game and Vice: Project Doom for NES use it to scroll background layers at different rates.\n\nMore advanced raster techniques can produce interesting effects. A system can achieve a very effective depth of field if layers with rasters are combined; Sonic the Hedgehog , Sonic The Hedgehog 2 , ActRaiser , Lionheart , Kid Chaos and Street Fighter II used this effect well. If each scanline has its own layer, the Pole Position effect is produced, which creates a pseudo-3D road (or a pseudo-3D ball court as in NBA Jam ) on a 2D system.\n\nIf the display system supports rotation and scaling in addition to scrolling—an effect popularly known as Mode 7 —changing the rotation and scaling factors can draw a projection of a plane (as in F-Zero and Super Mario Kart ) or can warp the playfield to create an extra challenge factor.\n\nAnother advanced technique is row/column scrolling, where rows/columns of tiles on a screen can be scrolled individually. This technique is implemented in the graphics chips of various Sega arcade system boards since the Sega Space Harrier and System 16 , the Sega Mega Drive/Genesis console, and the Capcom CP System , Irem M-92 and Taito F3 System arcade game boards.\n\nIn the following animation, three layers are moving leftward at different speeds. Their speeds decrease from front to back and correspond to increases in relative distance from the viewer. The ground layer is moving 8 times as fast as the vegetation layer. The vegetation layer is moving two times as fast as the cloud layer.\n\nOne of the first implementations of parallax scrolling in the browser was created and shared in a blog post by web developer Glutnix in 2007, this included example code and a demo using JavaScript and CSS 2 that supported Internet Explorer 6 and other browsers of that era. \n\nIn a February 2008 tutorial on web design blog Think Vitamin, web designer Paul Annett explained how he had created a parallax effect using CSS and without JavaScript for the website of Silverback, a usability testing app. He demonstrated the effect on stage at SXSW Interactive 2009, with the help of audience participation and a man in a gorilla suit. \n\nAdvocates argue it is a simple way to embrace the fluidity of the Web, citing the Silverback website as the first example they had come across. \n\nProponents use parallax backgrounds as a tool to better engage users and improve the overall experience that a website provides. However, a Purdue University study, published in 2013, revealed the following findings: \"... although parallax scrolling enhanced certain aspects of the user experience, it did not necessarily improve the overall user experience\". A undated study occurring during or after 2010 by Dede Frederick, James Mohler, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, and Ronald Glotzbach noted that parallax scrolling \"may cause certain people to experience nausea.\" ",
  "The Sizewell nuclear site consists of two nuclear power stations , one of which is still operational, located near the small fishing village of Sizewell in Suffolk , England . Sizewell A, with two Magnox reactors, is now in the process of being decommissioned. Sizewell B has a single pressurised water reactor (PWR) and is the UK's newest nuclear power station. A third power station, to consist of twin EPR reactors, is planned to be built as Sizewell C .\n\nSizewell B is due to close in 2035, although EDF has announced that it is planning a 20 year life extension until 2055.\n\nThe site of Sizewell A occupies 245 acres (99 ha) north of Sizewell. It is on a low plateau above flood level. The geological foundation comprises Norwich Crag Formation and Red Crag Formation bedrock of Pleistocene age above Eocene London Clay . The Crag deposits predominantly consist of medium dense and dense sands with thin layers of clay and silt and fossiliferous shelly horizons. The Crag strata extend to a depth of 200 feet (61 m) below ground level. In 1972/73, Sizewell A was awarded the Christopher Hinton trophy in recognition of good housekeeping .\n\nThe site is reached by road, with the nearest railhead about one mile inland at Sizewell Halt. Sidings were installed at the railhead primarily to transport irradiated elements to the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority plant at Sellafield , Cumbria . Nuclear fuel was handled by a crane loading facility at the end of the 5-mile (8.0 km) Leiston/Sizewell branch railway. This is connected to the East Suffolk line via a south-facing junction to the north of Saxmundham station . The line was extended and used for the delivery of construction materials for Sizewell B power station in the 1980s. The line is now only rarely used for transportation of spent fuels from Sizewell B since the completion of decommissioning of Sizewell A in 2006. A new branch line off the Leiston branch has been proposed for rail terminals for the construction of Sizewell C power station to the north of the existing B power station. \n\nIn March 1958 East Suffolk County Council selected the Sizewell site from shortlist to be earmarked for a nuclear power station, and in September the Central Electricity Generating Board announced it would apply for consent to build one there. The following February of 1959, the planning committee of Suffolk County Council recommended approval of the plans, and that no public inquiry was necessary. They received two objections (from the headmaster of Sizewell Hall girls school who feared pupils would be subject to \"annoying remarks\" from workmen, and from Ipswich Natural History Society). In January 1960 the Minister of Power gave consent for the project to proceed. \n\nThe main construction contract was awarded to British Nuclear Design and Construction Ltd ('BNDC'), a consortium of English Electric , Babcock & Wilcox and Taylor Woodrow Construction , in November 1960. The initial budget was £56 million, but due to inflation this figure rose to £65 million. During its 40-year operational lifetime, it had produced 110 TWh (400 PJ) of electricity, which would have been sufficient to meet the domestic needs of England and Wales for six months. Unit 1 was commissioned on 21 March 1966, and Unit 2 on 15 September. The station was officially opened on 7 April 1967 by the Lord Lieutenant of Suffolk , the Earl of Stradbroke .\n\nThe designed net electrical output of the station was 652 MWe . The power station originally had a single 324.75 MW turbo-alternator, and a gross generating capability of 327.7 MW. In 1967 a second turbo-alternator was commissioned with a rating of 275 MW. The total generating capacity was reduced to 490 MW in 1969, and then 420 MWe in 1973, to arrest the rate of oxidation of internal reactor-core components. At full load, 70 MWe were used in providing works power from the gross electrical output of 490 MWe. \n\nThe main plant consisted of two 1,010 MW (thermal) Magnox reactors, which were natural uranium, carbon dioxide gas cooled, graphite moderated units. These supplied heat to eight boiler units, four associated with each reactor. The steam produced by the boilers was fed to two turbo-generators each rated at 325 MW, but which operated at a reduced capacity of 250 MW from 1969.\n\nThe reactors and turbines were both supplied by English Electric. \n\nThe foundations for the reactors and associated boilers are provided by a reinforced concrete raft 8 feet (2.4 m) thick, founded on the sand with a designed net bearing pressure of 3.5 tons per square foot. The biological shields are 100 feet (30 m) high and vary between 10 and 14 feet (3.0 and 4.3 m) thick. The composite steel and reinforced concrete cap above each reactor is 12 feet (3.7 m) thick. Both reactors were housed in a single building to achieve savings in building costs.\n\nThe turbine house is a steel-framed, aluminium clad building 380 feet (120 m) long, 160 feet (49 m) wide and 90 feet (27 m) high, with a reinforced concrete basement 26 feet (7.9 m) deep. The foundations are provided by isolated bases and strip footings with a designed maximum bearing pressure of 3 tons per square foot.\n\nThe pumphouse which supplied the main turbines with 27,000,000 imperial gallons (120,000,000 L; 32,000,000 US gal) of cooling water per hour drew sea water from an intake structure about 1,350 feet (410 m) offshore via twin 10-foot (3.0 m) diameter tunnels. This water was returned to the sea through similar tunnels discharging 350 feet (110 m) offshore.\n\nElectricity output from Sizewell A power station over the period 1966-84 was as follows. \n\nSizewell A annual electricity output GWh.\n\nThe power station was shut down on 31 December 2006. The Nuclear Decommissioning Authority (NDA) subsidiary Magnox Ltd is responsible for placing contracts for the decommissioning of Sizewell A, at a budgeted cost of £1.2 billion. Defuelling was completed in 2014. Removal of most buildings is expected to take until 2034, followed by a care and maintenance phase from 2034 to 2092. Demolition of reactor buildings and final site clearance is planned for 2088 to 2098. \n\nOn 7 January 2007, a contractor working on the decommissioning of the station noticed water leaking on to the floor of the laundry where he was washing his clothes. The water was found to be cooling water from the pond that holds the reactor's spent nuclear fuel which had dropped more than 1 foot (0.30 m) without activating any of the alarms. It is estimated that up to 40,000 imperial gallons (180,000 L; 48,000 US gal) of radioactive water had leaked from a 15-foot (4.6 m) split in a pipe, with some spilling into the North Sea . According to the HM Nuclear Installation Inspectorate's report of the incident, without the chance intervention of the contractor, the pond could have drained before the next scheduled plant inspection. If the exposed irradiated fuel had caught fire, it would have resulted in an airborne off-site release of radiation . \n\nSizewell B is the UK's only commercial pressurised water reactor (PWR) power station. Its single reactor was built and commissioned between 1987 and 1995, and first synchronised with the national grid on 14 February 1995. The main civil engineering contractor was John Laing . The power station is operated by EDF Energy . The architectural design was carried out by Yorke Rosenberg Mardall . \n\nEDF's strategic target is for a 20-year life extension for Sizewell B PWR, beyond the current accounting closure date of 2035. This would mean the plant remaining in operation until 2055. EDF reaffirmed this plan in December 2024. As of 2022 [update] , the power station is still planned to close in 2035. However, a government official is cited stating that \"it probably will be extended\", while EDF intends to take a final decision on the estimated investment of £500-£700 million in 2024. \n\nThe nuclear island at Sizewell B is based on a Westinghouse 4-loop plant known as SNUPPS (Standard Nuclear Unit Power Plant System) initially designed in the 1970s and used at Wolf Creek and Callaway but with additional redundancy and diversity in the safety systems, and other modifications such as the addition of a passive Emergency Boration System. The containment design was not based on SNUPPS however, but was designed by NNC (National Nuclear Corporation – bought by Amec Foster Wheeler in 2005) in conjunction with Bechtel .\n\nThe Wolf Creek and Callaway plants each have single half speed, 1,800 RPM (60 Hz), steam turbine-alternator sets which use the steam produced from the heat generated in the reactor to produce about 1,200 MW of electricity at the US grid frequency of 60 Hz. Such large turbo-alternator sets were not available in the UK at the time Sizewell B was designed. So that orders could be given to UK manufacturers, and to avoid project risk in dealing with what were at the time newly designed very large turbo-alternator sets, Sizewell B uses two full-speed, 3,000 RPM (50 Hz), nominal 660 MW turbo-alternator sets similar to those used at the AGR power stations Hinkley Point B, Heysham 1, Hartlepool and Torness, and at some fossil-fuel power stations elsewhere, but adapted to cope with the wetter steam conditions produced by the PWR steam supply system. PWR steam supply systems produce saturated steam at lower temperature and pressure than the dry superheated steam produced by AGR reactors or fossil-fuel power stations, and the high- and intermediate-pressure stages of the steam turbines have to be designed cope with this. Sizewell B can run at half power using one turbo-alternator. \n\nThe major components were supplied by: \n\nA distinctive white hemisphere envelopes the outer shell of the twin-walled containment building that protects the pressurised water reactor and its steam generators .\n\nFirst announced in 1969 as an advanced gas-cooled reactor (AGR) based power station, and then in 1974 as a steam-generating heavy water reactor (SGHWR), Sizewell B was eventually announced as a PWR power station in 1980. The initial design submissions to the CEGB and the Nuclear Installations Inspectorate (NII) were based on the design of the Trojan plant at Portland, Oregon . Designed by Westinghouse, construction of Trojan began in 1970 and was completed in 1975. Westinghouse continued to develop the design they had used for the Trojan plant into the SNUPPS design, built first at Callaway, and SNUPPS was adopted as the basis for the design approved by the CEGB in October 1981. \n\nBefore construction commenced, the design of Sizewell B was subjected to a detailed safety review by the NII, and a lengthy public inquiry. The Pre-Construction Safety Case was submitted to the NII in August 1981. The public inquiry was held between 1982 and 1985, and took over 16 million words of evidence, a record at the time. The chairman of the inquiry, Sir Frank Layfield, reported in early 1987 that, subject to a satisfactory safety case, there were no substantive reasons why the project should not proceed. The Nuclear Installations Inspectorate accepted the Pre-Construction Safety Case and issued a licence to proceed with construction in August 1987.\n\nSizewell B was calculated to be economically viable at a 5% discount rate and was approved financially on that basis. The project cost was revised upwards three times to 135% of the original cost, providing a cost-performance of £2,250/kW (2000 prices) not including first of a kind costs and £3,000/kW including them. A post-startup evaluation estimated generating cost were about 6p/kWh (2000 prices, equivalent to £128/MWh in 2023), excluding first-of-kind costs but using an 8% discount rate for the cost of capital, much higher than the expected cost in 1995 of 3.5p/kWh (2000 prices, equivalent to £74/MWh in 2023). \n\nSizewell B was built and commissioned between 1987 and 1995, and first synchronised with the National Grid on 14 February 1995. The cost of Sizewell B has been quoted as £2 billion (1987 prices) with a quarter of that cost being related to civil engineering works. \n\nThe original rating was for a thermal power of 3,444 MW and gross electrical output of 1,250 MW, which after house load of 62 MW gave a net output to the grid of 1,188 MWe, equivalent to 8.7 TWh (31 PJ) in the year of 2005. It was uprated by 1% in 2013 with a thermal power of 3,479 MW and an electrical output of 1,195 MWe, though this is dependent on seawater temperature.\n\nAs with many other PWRs, Sizewell B operates on an 18-month operating cycle, i.e. at or near 100% output continuously for around 18 months, followed by a month's shutdown for maintenance and refuelling. Sizewell B was designed for a commercial life of 40 years (i.e. to around 2035) but similar stations elsewhere have been granted extensions to 60 years.\n\nOn 27 May 2008, Sizewell B had an unplanned shutdown, cutting off its supply to the National Grid. A British Energy spokesman said that the fault involved conventional equipment at the plant rather than any part of the nuclear reactor. \n\nOn 17 March 2010, Sizewell B was taken offline for an extended period because of high moisture levels in the containment building due to a pressuriser electrical heater fault, requiring difficult repairs. On 2 July 2010, just before 21:00, while still offline, a minor fire broke out on the second floor of the building housing the charcoal adsorber at Sizewell B. Numerous emergency services were called to the scene and the fire was brought under control by 3:30 the following day when the charcoal adsorber was flooded. \n\nOn 2 March 2012, Sizewell B had an unplanned shutdown due to an electrical fault. One and a half weeks later it was restarted at half capacity. As of June 2012 [update] , conditions improved and Sizewell B continued under carefully controlled operation.\n\nIn 2013, a new remote Emergency Response Centre was inaugurated near the power station, following recommendations made after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster . The centre provides remote controls and a back-up plant. \n\nIn January 2014, the building of a dry spent nuclear fuel store began. The existing spent fuel pool , which stores spent fuel under water, was expected to reach full capacity in 2015. In April 2016, the building was inaugurated. This will enable spent nuclear fuel produced from autumn 2016 until at least 2035 to be stored until a deep geological repository is available. In March 2017, the first cask containing spent nuclear fuel was installed. \n\nIn 2021, Sizewell B had an extended outage for maintenance and safety related issues. The Times reported that excessive wear on some stainless steel \"thermal sleeves\" in the control rod mechanisms had been discovered. The maintenance period was extended to over four months to evaluate the cause and extent of the wear to decide how many to replace. \n\nSince the sale of British Energy to Électricité de France (EDF) in February 2009, plans for a further twin-unit reactor to be built at Sizewell have looked increasingly likely. Sizewell already has a connection agreement in place for a new nuclear power plant to be built. The government revealed that the 1,600 MW projected units, to be called Sizewell C, would, together with the planned units at Hinkley Point C , contribute 13% of UK electricity in the early 2020s. EDF plans to use Framatome 's EPR design for any new-build reactors in the UK, this being the design of reactors currently being built in Olkiluoto, Finland , Flamanville, France and Taishan, China . \n\nOn 18 October 2010, the British government announced that Sizewell was one of the eight sites which it considered suitable for future nuclear power stations. \n\nOn 21 October 2015, it was reported that Britain and China had reached Strategic Investment Agreements for three nuclear power plants, including one at Sizewell, though no specific financing plans for Sizewell are agreed. The final investment decision for Sizewell C is only likely to take place after the Hinkley Point C build has started. \n\nIn May 2020, the NGO Energy for Humanity issued an open letter calling for the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy to support the project as without nuclear the \"action on climate will be more difficult, more expensive, and more likely to fail\". It also called for lessons to be drawn from Hinkley Point C as well as the UK's offshore wind programme to ensure a timely procurement schedule. \n\nConcerns have been expressed regarding one of the shareholders in the consortium, China General Nuclear Power Group . CGN is owned by the Chinese government and has been blacklisted by the US Department of Commerce for attempting to acquire advanced US nuclear technology and material for diversion to military use. \n\nEDF submitted its planning application in May 2020, declaring 25,000 job opportunities and 70% of investment being spent in UK. The plant will largely replicate Hinkley Point C design to reuse experience, lower cost and ensure high levels of safety. The proposal was welcomed by Unite the Union . \n\nOn 27 May 2020, EDF Energy announced that it had submitted a development consent order application. However EDF have yet to organise financing, and cannot take on more construction risk in the UK. EDF is looking to the UK government to assist on financing either by offering a regulated asset base (RAB) model used on less risky infrastructure, though that puts an immediate cost burden on end consumers or through other approaches such as a government equity stake in the development. \n\nOn 30 June 2020, EDF Energy announced that it had applied to the Office for Nuclear Regulation (ONR) for a licence to build and operate Sizewell C. The ONR is responsible for the safe operation of nuclear sites in the UK and for permitting new nuclear site licences – one of the key regulatory requirements for building and operating a new power station. \n\nIn March 2022, it was announced that the UK government and EDF would each take a 20% stake in the project, with infrastructure investors and pension funds expected to take up the remaining 60%. ",
  "A spear is a polearm consisting of a shaft, usually of wood , with a pointed head. The head may be simply the sharpened end of the shaft itself, as is the case with fire hardened spears, or it may be made of a more durable material fastened to the shaft, such as bone , flint , obsidian , copper , bronze , iron , or steel . The most common design for hunting and/or warfare, since modern times has incorporated a metal spearhead shaped like a triangle , diamond , or leaf . The heads of fishing spears usually feature multiple sharp points , with or without barbs.\n\nSpears can be divided into two broad categories: those designed for thrusting as a melee weapon (including weapons such as lances and pikes ) and those designed for throwing as a ranged weapon (usually referred to as javelins ).\n\nThe spear has been used throughout human history as a weapon for hunting and/or fishing and for warfare. Along with the club , knife , and axe , it is one of the earliest and most widespread tools ever developed by early humans. As a weapon, it may be wielded with either one or two hands. It was used in virtually every conflict up until the modern era , where even to this day, it lives on in the form of a bayonet fixed onto the muzzle of a long gun . \n\nThe word spear comes from the Old English spere , from the Proto-Germanic speri , from a Proto-Indo-European root *sper- \"spear, pole\".\n\nSpear manufacture and use is not confined to humans. It is also practiced by the western chimpanzee . Chimpanzees near Kédougou , Senegal have been observed to create spears by breaking straight limbs off trees, stripping them of their bark and side branches, and sharpening one end with their teeth. They then used the weapons to hunt galagos sleeping in hollows. \n\nThe Clacton Spear found in England and the Schöningen spears found in present-day Germany document that wooden spears have been used for hunting since at least 400,000 years ago. A 2012 study from the site of Kathu Pan in South Africa suggests that hominids, possibly Homo heidelbergensis , may have developed the technology of hafted stone-tipped spears in Africa about 500,000 years ago. Wood does not preserve well, however, and Craig Stanford, a primatologist and professor of anthropology at the University of Southern California , has suggested that the discovery of spear use by chimpanzees means that early humans may have used wooden spears before this. \n\nFrom circa 200,000 BC onwards, Middle Paleolithic humans began to make complex stone blades with flaked edges which were used as spear heads. These stone heads could be fixed to the spear shaft by gum or resin or by bindings made of animal sinew, leather strips or vegetable matter. During this period, a clear difference remained between spears designed to be thrown and those designed to be used in hand-to-hand combat. By the Magdalenian period (c. 15,000–9500 BC), spear-throwers similar to the later atlatl were in use. \n\nThe spear is the main weapon of the warriors of Homer 's Iliad . The use of both a single thrusting spear and two throwing spears are mentioned. It has been suggested that two styles of combat are being described; an early style, with thrusting spears, dating to the Mycenaean period in which the Iliad is set, and, anachronistically, a later style, with throwing spears, from Homer's own Archaic period. \n\nIn the 7th century BC, the Greeks evolved a new close-order infantry formation, the phalanx . The key to this formation was the hoplite , who was equipped with a large, circular, bronze-faced shield ( aspis ) and a 210–270 cm (7–9 ft) spear with an iron head and bronze butt-spike ( doru ). The hoplite phalanx dominated warfare among the Greek City States from the 7th into the 4th century BC.\n\nThe 4th century saw major changes. One was the greater use of peltasts , light infantry armed with spear and javelins. The other was the development of the sarissa , a two-handed pike 550 cm (18 ft) in length, by the Macedonians under Phillip of Macedon and Alexander the Great . The pike phalanx, supported by peltasts and cavalry, became the dominant mode of warfare among the Greeks from the late 4th century onward until Greek military systems were supplanted by the Roman legions.\n\nIn the pre-Marian Roman armies, the first two lines of battle, the hastati and principes , often fought with a sword called a gladius and pila , heavy javelins that were specifically designed to be thrown at an enemy to pierce and foul a target's shield. Originally the principes were armed with a short spear called a hasta , but these gradually fell out of use, eventually being replaced by the gladius. The third line, the triarii , continued to use the hasta .\n\nFrom the late 2nd century BC, all legionaries were equipped with the pilum . The pilum continued to be the standard legionary spear until the end of the 2nd century AD. Auxilia , however, were equipped with a simple hasta and, perhaps, javelins or darts. During the 3rd century AD, although the pilum continued to be used, legionaries usually were equipped with other forms of throwing and thrusting spear, similar to auxilia of the previous century. By the 4th century, the pilum had effectively disappeared from common use. \n\nIn the late period of the Roman Empire, the spear became more often used because of its anti-cavalry capacities as the barbarian invasions were often conducted by people with a developed culture of cavalry in warfare.\n\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the spear and shield continued to be used by nearly all Western European cultures. Since a medieval spear required only a small amount of steel along the sharpened edges (most of the spear-tip was wrought iron), it was an economical weapon. Quick to manufacture, and needing less smithing skill than a sword, it remained the main weapon of the common soldier. The Vikings , for instance, although often portrayed with an axe , sword , or lance in hand, were armed mostly with spears, as were their Anglo-Saxon , Irish , or continental contemporaries. Spears eventually evolved into lances; this is where the lance depiction comes from. With a good majority of Medieval weapons being spears they became integrated into many war tactics. Spears were very commonly used while providing a defensive block. When men on horses tried to get by these blocks, they would often be killed by the spears that could poke through the shield walls. Spears became more common than swords and axes because of how cheap, long, and fast spears were made. \n\nBroadly speaking, spears were either designed to be used in melee, or to be thrown. Within this simple classification, there was a remarkable range of types. For example, M. J. Swanton identified thirty different spearhead categories and sub-categories in early Saxon England. Most medieval spearheads were generally leaf-shaped. Notable types of early medieval spears include the angon , a throwing spear with a long head similar to the Roman pilum , used by the Franks and Anglo-Saxons, and the winged (or lugged) spear , which had two prominent wings at the base of the spearhead, either to prevent the spear penetrating too far into an enemy or to aid in spear fencing. Originally a Frankish weapon, the winged spear also was popular with the Vikings. It would become the ancestor of later medieval polearms, such as the partisan and spetum .\n\nThe thrusting spear also has the advantage of reach, being considerably longer than other weapon types. Exact spear lengths are hard to deduce as few spear shafts survive archaeologically, but 180–240 cm (6–8 ft) would seem to have been the average length. Some nations were noted for their long spears, including the Scots and the Flemish. Spears usually were used in tightly ordered formations, such as the shield wall or the schiltron . To resist cavalry, spear shafts could be planted against the ground. William Wallace drew up his schiltrons in a circle at the Battle of Falkirk in 1298 to deter charging cavalry; this was a widespread tactic sometimes known as the \"crown\" formation. Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray used a circular schiltron on the first day of the Battle of Bannockburn . However, the rectangular schiltron was much more common and was used by King Robert the Bruce on the second day of the Battle of Bannockburn and in the Battle of Old Byland when he defeated English armies. \n\nThrowing spears became rarer as the Middle Ages drew on, but survived in the hands of specialists such as the Catalan Almogavars . They were commonly used in Ireland until the end of the 16th century. \n\nSpears began to lose fashion among the infantry during the 14th century, being replaced by polearms that combined the thrusting properties of the spear with the cutting properties of the axe, such as the halberd . Where spears were retained they grew in length, eventually evolving into pikes , which would be a dominant infantry weapon in the 16th and 17th centuries. \n\nCavalry spears were originally the same as infantry spears and were often used with two hands or held with one hand overhead. In the 12th century, after the adoption of stirrups and a high-cantled saddle, the spear became a decidedly more powerful weapon. A mounted knight would secure the lance by holding it with one hand and tucking it under the armpit (the couched lance technique) In combination with a lance rest , this allowed all the momentum of the horse and knight to be focused on the weapon's tip, whilst still retaining accuracy and control. This use of the spear spurred the development of the lance as a distinct weapon that was perfected in the medieval sport of jousting . \n\nIn the 14th century, tactical developments meant that knights and men-at-arms often fought on foot. This led to the practice of shortening the lance to about 150 cm (5 ft) to make it more manageable. As dismounting became commonplace, specialist polearms such as the pollaxe were adopted by knights and this practice ceased. \n\nThe development of both the long, two-handed pike and gunpowder firearms in Renaissance Europe saw an ever-increasing focus on integrated infantry tactics. Those infantry not armed with these weapons carried variations on the polearm, including the halberd and the bill . At the start of the Renaissance, cavalry remained predominantly lance-armed; gendarmes with the heavy knightly lance and lighter cavalry with a variety of lighter lances. By the 1540s, however, pistol-armed cavalry called reiters were beginning to make their mark. Cavalry armed with pistols and other lighter firearms, along with a sword, had virtually replaced lance armed cavalry in Western Europe by the beginning of the 17th century. \n\nUltimately, the spear proper was rendered obsolete on the battlefield. Its last flowering was the half-pike or spontoon , a shortened version of the pike carried by officers of various ranks. While originally a weapon, this came to be seen more as a badge of office, or leading staff by which troops were directed. The half-pike, sometimes known as a boarding pike, was also used as a weapon on board ships until the late 19th century. \n\nMuslim warriors used a spear that was called an az-zaġāyah . Berbers pronounced it zaġāya , but the English term, derived from the Old French via Berber , is \" assegai \". It is a polearm used for throwing or hurling, usually a light spear or javelin made of hard wood and pointed with a forged iron tip. The az-zaġāyah played an important role during the Islamic conquest as well as during later periods, well into the 20th century. A longer pole az-zaġāyah was being used as a hunting weapon from horseback. The az-zaġāyah was widely used. It existed in various forms in areas stretching from Southern Africa to the Indian subcontinent , although these places already had their own variants of the spear. This javelin was the weapon of choice during the Fulani jihad as well as during the Mahdist War in Sudan. It is still being used by certain wandering Sufi ascetics ( Derwishes ) .\n\nIn the Chinese martial arts , the Chinese spear ( Qiang 槍) is popularly known as the \"king of weapons\". The spear is listed in the group of the four major weapons (along with the gun ( staff ), dao (a single-edged blade similar to a sabre ), and the jian ( sword )). \n\nSpears were used first as hunting weapons amongst the ancient Chinese. They became popular as infantry weapons during the Warring States and Qin era, when spearmen were used as especially highly disciplined soldiers in organized group attacks. When used in formation fighting, spearmen would line up their large rectangular or circular shields in a shieldwall manner. The Qin also employed long spears (more akin to a pike) in formations similar to Swiss pikemen in order to ward off cavalry. The Han Empire would use similar tactics as its Qin predecessors. Halberds, polearms, and dagger axes were also common weapons during this time.\n\nSpears were also common weaponry for Warring States, Qin, and Han era cavalry units. During these eras, the spear would develop into a longer lance-like weapon used for cavalry charges.\n\nThere are many words in Chinese that would be classified as a spear in English. The Mao is the predecessor of the Qiang . The first bronze Mao appeared in the Shang dynasty . This weapon was less prominent on the battlefield than the ge ( dagger-axe ). In some archaeological examples two tiny holes or ears can be found in the blade of the spearhead near the socket, these holes were presumably used to attach tassels, much like modern day wushu spears.\n\nIn the early Shang , the Mao appeared to have a relatively short shaft as well as a relatively narrow shaft as opposed to Mao in the later Shang and Western Zhou period. Some Mao from this era are heavily decorated as is evidenced by a Warring States period Mao from the Ba Shu area. \n\nIn the Han dynasty the Mao and the Ji (戟 Ji can be loosely defined as a halberd) rose to prominence in the military. Interesting to note is that the amount of iron Mao-heads found exceeds the number of bronze heads. By the end of the Han dynasty ( Eastern Han ) the process of replacement of the iron Mao had been completed and the bronze Mao had been rendered completely obsolete. After the Han dynasty toward the Sui and Tang dynasties the Mao used by cavalry were fitted with much longer shafts, as is mentioned above. During this era, the use of the Shuo (矟) was widespread among the footmen. The Shuo can be likened to a pike or simply a long spear. \n\nAfter the Tang dynasty, the popularity of the Mao declined and was replaced by the Qiang (枪). The Tang dynasty divided the Qiang in four categories: \"一曰漆枪， 二曰木枪， 三曰白杆枪， 四曰扑头枪。” Roughly translated the four categories are: Qi (a kind of wood) Spears, Wooden Spears, Bai Gan (A kind of wood) Spears and Pu Tou Qiang. The Qiang that were produced in the Song and Ming dynasties consisted of four major parts: Spearhead, Shaft, End Spike and Tassel. The types of Qiang that exist are many. Among the types there are cavalry Qiang that were the length of one zhang (approximately 320 cm or 10 ft), Litte-Flower Spears (Xiao Hua Qiang 小花枪) that are the length of one person and their arm extended above his head, double hooked spears, single hooked spears, ringed spears and many more. \n\nThere is some confusion as to how to distinguish the Qiang from the Mao , as they are obviously very similar. Some people say that a Mao is longer than a Qiang , others say that the main difference is between the stiffness of the shaft, where the Qiang would be flexible and the Mao would be stiff. Scholars seem to lean toward the latter explanation more than the former. Because of the difference in the construction of the Mao and the Qiang , the usage is also different, though there is no definitive answer as to what exactly the differences are between the Mao and the Qiang . \n\nSpears are known as Bhala in Indian languages. Spears in the Indian society were used both in missile and non-missile form, both by cavalry and foot-soldiers. Mounted spear-fighting was practiced using with a 300 cm (10 ft), ball-tipped wooden lance called a bothati , the end of which was covered in dye so that hits may be confirmed. Spears were constructed from a variety of materials such as the sang made completely of steel, and the ballam which had a bamboo shaft.\n\nThe Arab presence in Sindh and the Mameluks of Delhi introduced the Middle Eastern javelin into India.\n\nThe Rajputs wielded a type of spear for infantrymen which had a club integrated into the spearhead, and a pointed butt end. Other spears had forked blades, several spear-points, and numerous other innovations. One particular spear unique to India was the vita or corded lance.\n\nUsed by the Maratha Army , it had a rope connecting the spear with the user's wrist, allowing the weapon to be thrown and pulled back. The Vel is a type of spear or lance, originated in Southern India , primarily used by Tamils . \n\nSikh Nihangs sometimes carry a spear even today. Spears were used in conflicts and training by armed paramilitary units such as the razakars of Nizams of Hyderabad State as late as the second half of the 20th century.\n\nThe hoko spear was used in ancient Japan sometime between the Yayoi period and the Heian period , but it became unpopular as early samurai often acted as horseback archers . Medieval Japan employed spears again for infantrymen to use, but it was not until the 11th century in that samurai began to prefer spears over bows. Several polearms were used in the Japanese theatres; the naginata was a glaive-like weapon with a long, curved blade popularly among the samurai and the Buddhist warrior-monks , often used against cavalry; the yari was a longer polearm, with a straight-bladed spearhead, which became the weapon of choice of both the samurai and the ashigaru (footmen) during the Warring States Era ; the horseback samurai used shorter yari for his single-armed combat; on the other hand, ashigaru infantries used long yari (similar with European pike ) for their massed combat formation.\n\nFilipino spears ( sibat ) were used as both a weapon and a tool throughout the Philippines . It is also called a bangkaw (after the Bankaw Revolt .), sumbling or palupad in the islands of Visayas and Mindanao . Sibat are typically made from rattan, either with a sharpened tip or a head made from metal. These heads may either be single-edged, double-edged or barbed. Styles vary according to function and origin. For example, a sibat designed for fishing may not be the same as those used for hunting.\n\nThe spear was used as the primary weapon in expeditions and battles against neighbouring island kingdoms and it became famous during the 1521 Battle of Mactan , where the chieftain Lapu Lapu of Cebu fought against Spanish forces led by Ferdinand Magellan who was subsequently killed.\n\nThe various types of the assegai (a light spear or javelin made of wood and pointed with iron or fire-hardened tip) were used throughout Africa and it was the most common weapon used before the introduction of firearms . The Zulu , Xhosa and other Nguni tribes of South Africa were renowned for their use of the assegai. Shaka of the Zulu invented a shorter stabbing spear with a 30 cm (1 ft) shaft and a larger, broader blade one foot (0.3m) long. This weapon is otherwise known as the iklwa or ixwa , after the sound that was heard as it was withdrawn from the victim's wound. The traditional spear was not abandoned, but was used to range attack enemy formations before closing in for close quarters battle with the iklwa. This tactical combination originated during Shaka's military reforms . This weapon was typically used with one hand while the off hand held a cowhide shield for protection.\n\nSimilar to most armies of their period, Ancient Egyptian forces were centered around the use of the spear. In battle, spearmen would be armed with a bronze -tipped spear (dja) and shield (ikem), which were used in elaborate formations much like Greek and Roman forces. Before the Hyksos invasion into Egypt, wooden spears were used, which were prone to splinter, but the influx of a new population brought innovations around bronze technology. Unlike other cultures who wielded spears at this time, the Egyptians did not treat their javelins (around 1 meter to 3.3 feet long) as disposable, using them both for thrusting and throwing. \n\nAs advanced metallurgy was largely unknown in pre-Columbian America outside of Western Mexico and South America , most weapons in Meso-America were made of wood or obsidian . This did not mean that they were less lethal, as obsidian may be sharpened to become many times sharper than steel. Meso-American spears varied greatly in shape and size. While the Aztecs preferred the sword-like macuahuitl clubs for fighting, the advantage of a far-reaching thrusting weapon was recognised, and a large portion of the army would carry the tepoztopilli into battle. The tepoztopilli was a polearm, and to judge from depictions in various Aztec codices, it was roughly the height of a man, with a broad wooden head about twice the length of the users' palm or shorter, edged with razor-sharp obsidian blades which were deeply set in grooves carved into the head, and cemented in place with bitumen or plant resin as an adhesive. The tepoztopilli was able both to thrust and slash effectively.\n\nThrowing spears also were used extensively in Meso-American warfare, usually with the help of an atlatl . Throwing spears were typically shorter and more stream-lined than the tepoztopilli, and some had obsidian edges for greater penetration.\n\nTypically, most spears made by Native Americans were created from materials surrounding their communities. Usually, the shaft of the spear was made with a wooden stick while the head of the spear was fashioned from arrowheads, pieces of metal such as copper, or a bone that had been sharpened. Spears were a preferred weapon by many since it was inexpensive to create, could more easily be taught to others, and could be made quickly and in large quantities.\n\nNative Americans used the buffalo pound method to kill buffalo, which required a hunter to dress as a buffalo and lure one into a ravine where other hunters were hiding. Once the buffalo appeared, the other hunters would kill him with spears. A variation of this technique, called the buffalo jump , was when a runner would lead the animals towards a cliff. As the buffalo got close to the cliff, other members of the tribe would jump out from behind rocks or trees and scare the buffalo over the cliff. Other hunters would be waiting at the bottom of the cliff to spear the animal to death. \n\nOne of the earliest forms of killing prey for humans, hunting game with a spear and spear fishing continues to this day as both a means of catching food and as a cultural activity. Some of the most common prey for early humans were megafauna such as mammoths which were hunted with various kinds of spear. One theory for the Quaternary extinction event was that most of these animals were hunted to extinction by humans with spears. Even after the invention of other hunting weapons such as the bow and sling , the spear continued to be used, either as a projectile weapon or used by hand, such as in bear hunting and boar hunting .\n\nSpear hunting fell out of favor in most of Europe in the 18th century, but continued in Germany, enjoying a revival in the 1930s. Spear hunting is still practiced in the United States. Animals taken are primarily wild boar and deer , although trophy animals as large as Cape Buffalo have been hunted with spears. Alligators are hunted in Florida with a type of harpoon .\n\nIn underwater settings, the practice of sport fishing with spearguns is also quite prominent. The invention of the speargun is attributed to either Alec Kramarenko in the mid-1930s or Georges Beuchat in 1947.\n\nOne of the gymnastic exercises performed by the ancient Greeks was the throwing of a spear, referred to as ἀκυντισμός. \n\nLike many weapons, a spear may also be a symbol of power.\n\nThe Celts would symbolically destroy a dead warrior's spear either to prevent its use by another or as a sacrificial offering.\n\nIn classical Greek mythology Zeus ' bolts of lightning may be interpreted as a symbolic spear. Some would carry that interpretation to the spear that frequently is associated with Athena , interpreting her spear as a symbolic connection to some of Zeus' power beyond the Aegis once he rose to replacing other deities in the pantheon . Athena was depicted with a spear prior to that change in myths, however. Chiron 's wedding-gift to Peleus when he married the nymph Thetis in classical Greek mythology, was an ashen spear as the nature of ashwood with its straight grain made it an ideal choice of wood for a spear.\n\nThe Romans and their early enemies would force prisoners to walk underneath a 'yoke of spears', which humiliated them. The yoke would consist of three spears, two upright with a third tied between them at a height which made the prisoners stoop. It has been suggested that the arrangement has a magical origin, a way to trap evil spirits. \n\nIn Norse mythology, the god Odin 's spear (named Gungnir ) was made by the sons of Ivaldi. It had the special property that it never missed its mark. During the War with the Vanir, Odin symbolically threw Gungnir into the Vanir host. This practice of symbolically casting a spear into the enemy ranks at the start of a fight was sometimes used in historic clashes, to seek Odin's support in the coming battle. In Wagner 's opera Siegfried , the haft of Gungnir is said to be from the \"World-Tree\" Yggdrasil . \n\nOther spears of religious significance are the Holy Lance and the Lúin of Celtchar , believed by some to have vast mystical powers.\n\nSir James George Frazer in The Golden Bough noted the phallic nature of the spear and suggested that in the Arthurian legends the spear or lance functioned as a symbol of male fertility, paired with the Grail (as a symbol of female fertility).\n\nThe Hindu god of war Murugan is worshipped by Tamils in the form of the spear called Vel , which is his primary weapon. \n\nThe term spear is also used (in a somewhat archaic manner) to describe the male line of a family, as opposed to the distaff or female line.",
  "Douglas Noel Adams (11 March 1952 – 11 May 2001) was an English author, humorist , and screenwriter, best known as the creator of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy . Originally a 1978 BBC radio comedy , The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy evolved into a \" trilogy \" of six (or five, according to the author) books which sold more than 15 million copies in his life. It was made into a television series , several stage plays, comics, a video game , and a 2005 feature film . Adams's contribution to UK radio is commemorated in The Radio Academy 's Hall of Fame. \n\nAdams wrote Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency (1987) and The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul (1988), and co-wrote The Meaning of Liff (1983), The Deeper Meaning of Liff (1990) and Last Chance to See (1990). He wrote two stories for the television series Doctor Who , including the unaired serial Shada , co-wrote City of Death (1979), and served as script editor for its 17th season . He co-wrote the sketch \" Patient Abuse \" for the final episode of Monty Python's Flying Circus . A posthumous collection of his selected works, including the first publication of his final (unfinished) novel, was published as The Salmon of Doubt in 2002.\n\nAdams called himself a \"radical atheist\", an advocate for environmentalism and conservation , and a lover of fast cars, technological innovation, and the Apple Macintosh .\n\nAdams was born in Cambridge , England, on 11 March 1952 to Christopher Douglas Adams (1927–1985), a management consultant and computer salesman, former probation officer and lecturer on probationary group therapy techniques, and nurse Janet (1927–2016), née Donovan. A few months after his birth, the family moved to the East End of London , where his sister, Susan, was born three years later. His parents divorced in 1957; Douglas, Susan and their mother moved then to an RSPCA animal shelter in Brentwood, Essex , run by his maternal grandparents. Each parent remarried, giving Adams four half-siblings. A great-grandfather was the German playwright Frank Wedekind . \n\nAdams attended Primrose Hill Primary School in Brentwood. At the age of nine, he passed the entrance exam for Brentwood School . He attended the prep school from 1959 to 1964, then the main school until December 1970. Adams was 6 feet (1.8 m) tall by the age of 12, and stopped growing at 6 feet 5 inches (1.96 m). His form master, Frank Halford, said that Adams's height had made him stand out and that he had been self-conscious about it. His ability to write made him well-known in the school. Adams became the only student ever to be awarded a ten out of ten by Halford for creative writing – something he remembered for the rest of his life, particularly when facing writer's block . \n\nSome of his earliest writing was published at the school, such as a report on its photography club in The Brentwoodian in 1962, or spoof reviews in the school magazine Broadsheet , edited by Paul Neil Milne Johnstone , who later became a character in The Hitchhiker's Guide . Adams also designed the cover of one issue of the Broadsheet , and had a letter and short story published in The Eagle , the boys' comic, in 1965. A poem entitled \"A Dissertation on the task of writing a poem on a candle and an account of some of the difficulties thereto pertaining\" written by Adams in January 1970 at the age of 17, was discovered in a cupboard at the school in early 2014. \n\nOn the strength of an essay on religious poetry that discussed the Beatles and William Blake , Adams was awarded an Exhibition in English at St John's College, Cambridge (where his father had been a student), going up in 1971. He wanted to join the Footlights , an invitation-only student comedy club, that has acted as a hothouse for comic talent. He was not elected immediately as he had hoped and started to write and perform in revues with Will Adams (no relation) and Martin Smith; they formed a group called \"Adams-Smith-Adams\". He became a member of the Footlights by 1973. Despite doing very little work – he recalled having completed three essays in three years – he graduated in 1974 with a 2:2 in English literature . \n\nAfter leaving university, Adams moved back to London, determined to break into TV and radio as a writer. An edited version of the Footlights Revue appeared on BBC2 television in 1974. A version of the Revue performed live in London's West End led to Adams being discovered by Monty Python 's Graham Chapman . The two formed a brief writing partnership, earning Adams a writing credit in episode 45 of Monty Python for a sketch called \" Patient Abuse \". The pair also co-wrote the \"Marilyn Monroe\" sketch that appeared on the soundtrack album of Monty Python and the Holy Grail . Adams is one of only two people other than the original Python members to receive a Monty Python writing credit (the other being Neil Innes . \n\nAdams had two brief appearances in the fourth series of Monty Python's Flying Circus . At the beginning of episode 42, \"The Light Entertainment War\", Adams is in a surgeon's mask (as Dr. Emile Koning, according to on-screen captions), pulling on gloves, while Michael Palin narrates a sketch that introduces one person after another but never gets started. [ citation needed ] At the beginning of episode 44, \"Mr. Neutron\", Adams is dressed in a pepper-pot outfit and loads a missile onto a cart driven by Terry Jones , who is calling for scrap metal (\"Any old iron...\"). [ citation needed ] The two episodes were broadcast in November 1974. Adams and Chapman also attempted non-Python projects, including Out of the Trees . \n\nAt this point, Adams's career stalled; his writing style was unsuited to the current style of radio and TV comedy. To make ends meet he took a series of odd jobs, including as a hospital porter, barn builder, and chicken-shed cleaner. He was employed as a bodyguard by a Qatari family, who had made their fortune in oil. Adams continued to write and submit sketches, though few were accepted. In 1976, his career had a brief improvement when he wrote and performed Unpleasantness at Brodie's Close at the Edinburgh Fringe festival. By Christmas, work had dried up again and a depressed Adams moved to live with his mother. The lack of writing work hit him hard, and low confidence became a feature of Adams's life, \"I have terrible periods of lack of confidence [...] I briefly did therapy, but after a while I realised it was like a farmer complaining about the weather. You can't fix the weather – you just have to get on with it\". \n\nSome of Adams's early radio work included sketches for The Burkiss Way in 1977 and The News Huddlines . He also wrote, again with Chapman, the 20 February 1977 episode of Doctor on the Go , a sequel to the Doctor in the House television comedy series. After the first radio series of The Hitchhiker's Guide became successful, Adams was made a BBC radio producer, working on Week Ending and a pantomime called Black Cinderella Two Goes East . He left after six months to become the script editor for Doctor Who .\n\nIn 1979, Adams and John Lloyd wrote scripts for two half-hour episodes of Doctor Snuggles , \"The Remarkable Fidgety River\" and \"The Great Disappearing Mystery\" (episodes eight and twelve). John Lloyd was also co-author of two episodes from the original Hitchhiker radio series (\"Fit the Fifth\" and \"Fit the Sixth\", also known as \"Episode Five\" and \"Episode Six\"), as well as The Meaning of Liff and The Deeper Meaning of Liff .\n\nAdams sent the script for the HHGG pilot radio programme to the Doctor Who production office in 1978, and was commissioned to write The Pirate Planet . He had also previously attempted to submit a potential film script, called Doctor Who and the Krikkitmen , which later became his novel Life, the Universe and Everything (which in turn became the third Hitchhiker's Guide radio series). Adams then went on to serve as script editor on the show for its 17th season in 1979. Altogether, he wrote three Doctor Who serials starring Tom Baker as the Fourth Doctor :\n\nThe episodes authored by Adams are some of the few that were not originally novelised, as Adams would not allow anyone else to write them and asked for a higher price than the publishers were willing to pay. Shada was adapted as a novel by Gareth Roberts in 2012 and City of Death and The Pirate Planet by James Goss in 2015 and 2017 respectively. \n\nElements of Shada and City of Death were reused in Adams's later novel Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency , in particular, the character of Professor Chronotis . Big Finish Productions eventually remade Shada as an audio play starring Paul McGann as the Doctor. Accompanied by partly animated illustrations, it was webcast on the BBC website in 2003, and subsequently released as a two-CD set later that year. An omnibus edition of this version was broadcast on the digital radio station BBC7 on 10 December 2005.\n\nIn the Doctor Who 2012 Christmas episode \" The Snowmen \", writer Steven Moffat was inspired by a storyline that Adams pitched called The Doctor Retires . \n\nThe Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy was a concept for a science-fiction comedy radio series pitched by Adams and radio producer Simon Brett to BBC Radio 4 in 1977. Adams came up with an outline for a pilot episode, as well as a few other stories (reprinted in Neil Gaiman 's book Don't Panic: The Official Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy Companion ) that could be used in the series.\n\nAccording to Adams, the idea for the title occurred to him in 1971 while he lay drunk in a field in Innsbruck , Austria, gazing at the stars. He was carrying a copy of the Hitch-hiker's Guide to Europe , and it occurred to him that \"somebody ought to write a Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy \". \n\nDespite the original outline, Adams was said to make up the stories as he wrote. He turned to John Lloyd for help with the final two episodes of the first series . Lloyd contributed bits from an unpublished science fiction book of his own, called GiGax . Very little of Lloyd's material survived in later adaptations of Hitchhiker's , such as the novels and the TV series. The TV series was based on the first six radio episodes, and sections contributed by Lloyd were largely re-written.\n\nBBC Radio 4 broadcast the first radio series weekly in the UK starting 8 March 1978, lasting until April. The series was distributed in the United States by National Public Radio . Following the success of the first series, another episode was recorded and broadcast, which was commonly known as the Christmas Episode. A second series of five episodes was broadcast one per night, during the week of 21–25 January 1980.\n\nWhile working on the radio series (and with simultaneous projects such as The Pirate Planet ) Adams found difficulty in keeping to writing deadlines; the problem became worse as he proceeded to publish novels. He was never a prolific writer and usually had to be forced by others to do any writing. This included being locked in a hotel suite with his editor for three weeks to ensure that So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish was completed. Adams was quoted as saying, \"I love deadlines. I love the whooshing noise they make as they go by.\" Despite the difficulty with deadlines, he wrote five novels in the series, published in 1979, 1980, 1982, 1984, and 1992.\n\nThe books formed the basis for other adaptations, such as three-part comic book adaptations for each of the first three books, an interactive text-adventure computer game , and a photo-illustrated edition, published in 1994. This latter edition featured a 42 Puzzle designed by Adams, which was later incorporated into paperback covers of the first four Hitchhiker's novels (the paperback for the fifth re-used the artwork from the hardback edition). \n\nIn 1980, Adams began attempts to turn the first Hitchhiker's novel into a film, making several trips to Los Angeles, and working with Hollywood studios and potential producers. The next year, the radio series became the basis for a BBC television mini-series broadcast in six parts. When he died in 2001 in California, he had been trying again to get the film project started with Disney , which had bought the rights in 1998. The screenplay was rewritten by Karey Kirkpatrick and the Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy film was released in 2005.\n\nRadio producer Dirk Maggs had consulted with Adams, first in 1993, and later in 1997 and 2000 about creating a third radio series, based on the third novel in the Hitchhiker's series. They also discussed the possibilities of radio adaptations of the final two novels in the five-book \"trilogy\". As with the film, this project was realised only after Adams's death. The third series, The Tertiary Phase , was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in September 2004 and was subsequently released on audio CD. With the aid of a recording of his reading of Life, the Universe and Everything and editing, Adams can be heard playing the part of Agrajag posthumously. So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish and Mostly Harmless made up the fourth and fifth radio series, respectively (on radio they were titled The Quandary Phase and The Quintessential Phase ) and these were broadcast in May and June 2005, and also subsequently released on Audio CD. The last episode in the last series (with a new, \"more upbeat\" ending) concluded with, \"The very final episode of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy by Douglas Adams is affectionately dedicated to its author.\" \n\nBetween Adams's first trip to Madagascar with Mark Carwardine in 1985, and their series of travels that formed the basis for the radio series and non-fiction book Last Chance to See , Adams wrote two other novels with a new cast of characters. Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency was published in 1987, and was described by its author as \"a kind of ghost-horror-detective-time-travel-romantic-comedy-epic, mainly concerned with mud, music and quantum mechanics\". \n\nA sequel, The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul , was published a year later. It was Adams's first original work since So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish . After the book tour, Adams set off on his round-the-world excursion, which supplied him with the material for Last Chance to See . The Salmon of Doubt was incomplete when published posthumously.\n\nAdams played the guitar left-handed and had a collection of 24 left-handed guitars when he died (having received his first guitar in 1964). He also studied piano in the 1960s. Pink Floyd and Procol Harum had important influence on his work. During his segment on music discussion programme Private Passions , Adams remarked that he \"would have loved to have been a rock musician\". \n\nAdams's official biography shares its name with the song \" Wish You Were Here \" by Pink Floyd . The opening section of \" Shine On You Crazy Diamond \" was featured in a section of the third episode of the original 1978 Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy radio series (broadcast only, cut from commercial releases). Adams was friends with Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour and, on Adams's 42nd birthday, he was invited to make a guest appearance at Pink Floyd's concert of 28 October 1994 at Earls Court in London, playing guitar on the songs \" Brain Damage \" and \" Eclipse \". Adams chose the name for Pink Floyd's 1994 album, The Division Bell , by picking the words from the lyrics to one of its tracks, \" High Hopes \". Pink Floyd and the song \" Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun \" in particular, inspired Adams to create the rock band Disaster Area who appear in The Restaurant at the End of the Universe , who planned to crash a space ship into a nearby star as a stunt during a concert. Gilmour also performed at Adams's memorial service in 2001, and what would have been Adams's 60th birthday party in 2012. \n\nAdams created an interactive fiction version of HHGG with Steve Meretzky from Infocom in 1984. In 1986, he participated in a week-long brainstorming session with the Lucasfilm Games team for the game Labyrinth . Later he was also involved in creating Bureaucracy as a parody of events in his own life.\n\nAdams was a founder-director and Chief Fantasist of The Digital Village , a digital media and Internet company with which he created Starship Titanic , a Codie award -winning and BAFTA-nominated adventure game , which was published in 1998 by Simon & Schuster . Terry Jones wrote the accompanying book, entitled Douglas Adams' Starship Titanic , since Adams was too busy with the computer game to do both. In April 1999, Adams initiated the h2g2 collaborative writing project, an experimental attempt at making The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy a reality, and at harnessing the collective brainpower of the internet community. It was hosted by BBC Online from 2001 to 2011. \n\nIn 1990, Adams wrote and presented a television documentary programme Hyperland which featured Tom Baker as a \"software agent\" (similar to the assistant pictured in Apple's Knowledge Navigator video of future concepts from 1987), and interviews with Ted Nelson , the co-inventor of hypertext and the person who coined the term. Adams was an early adopter and advocate of hypertext.\n\nAdams described himself as a \"radical atheist \", adding \"radical\" for emphasis so he would not be asked if he meant agnostic. He told American Atheists that this conveyed the fact that he really meant it. He imagined a sentient puddle who wakes up one morning and thinks, \"This is an interesting world I find myself in – an interesting hole I find myself in – fits me rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact it fits me staggeringly well, must have been made to have me in it!\" to express his disbelief in the fine-tuned universe argument for God. \n\nHe remained fascinated by religion because of its effect on human affairs. \"I love to keep poking and prodding at it. I've thought about it so much over the years that that fascination is bound to spill over into my writing.\" \n\nThe evolutionary biologist and atheist Richard Dawkins invited Adams to participate in his 1991 Royal Institution Christmas Lectures , where Dawkins calls Adams from the audience to read a passage from The Restaurant at the End of the Universe which satirises the absurdity of the thought that any one species would exist on Earth merely to serve as a meal to another species, such as humans. Dawkins also uses Adams's influence to exemplify arguments for non-belief in his 2006 book The God Delusion . Dawkins dedicated the book to Adams, whom he jokingly called \"possibly [my] only convert\" to atheism and wrote on his death that \"Science has lost a friend, literature has lost a luminary, the mountain gorilla and the black rhino have lost a gallant defender.\" \n\nAdams was also an environmental activist who campaigned on behalf of endangered species . This activism included the production of the non-fiction radio series Last Chance to See , in which he and naturalist Mark Carwardine visited rare species such as the kākāpō and baiji , and the publication of a tie-in book of the same name. In 1992, this was made into a CD-ROM combination of audiobook , e-book and picture slide show.\n\nAdams and Mark Carwardine contributed the 'Meeting a Gorilla' passage from Last Chance to See to the book The Great Ape Project . This book, edited by Paola Cavalieri and Peter Singer , launched a wider-scale project in 1993, which calls for the extension of moral equality to include all great apes, human and non-human.\n\nIn 1994, Adams participated in a climb of Mount Kilimanjaro while wearing a rhino suit for the British charity organisation Save the Rhino International . Puppeteer William Todd-Jones , who had originally worn the suit in the London Marathon to raise money and bring awareness to the group, also participated in the climb wearing a rhino suit; Adams wore the suit while travelling to the mountain before the climb began. About £100,000 was raised through that event, benefiting schools in Kenya and a black rhinoceros preservation programme in Tanzania . Adams was also an active supporter of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund.\n\nSince 2003, Save the Rhino has held an annual Douglas Adams Memorial Lecture around the time of his birthday to raise money for environmental campaigns. \n\nAdams bought his first word processor in 1982, having considered one as early as 1979. His first purchase was a Nexu. In 1983, when he and Jane Belson went to Los Angeles, he bought a DEC Rainbow . Upon their return to England, Adams bought an Apricot , then a BBC Micro and a Tandy 1000 . In Last Chance to See , Adams mentions his Cambridge Z88 , which he had taken to Zaire on a quest to find the northern white rhinoceros . \n\nAdams's posthumously published work, The Salmon of Doubt , features several articles by him on the subject of technology, including reprints of articles that originally ran in MacUser , and in The Independent on Sunday . In these, Adams claims that one of the first computers he ever saw was a Commodore PET , and that he had \"adored\" his Apple Macintosh (\"or rather my family of however many Macintoshes it is that I've recklessly accumulated over the years\") since he first saw one at Infocom's offices in Boston in 1984. \n\nAdams was a Macintosh user from the time they first came out in 1984 until his death in 2001. He was the first person to buy a Mac in Europe, the second being Stephen Fry . Adams was also an \" Apple Master \", celebrities whom Apple made into spokespeople for its products (others included John Cleese and Gregory Hines ). Adams's contributions included a rock video that he created using the first version of iMovie with footage featuring his daughter Polly. The video was available on Adams's .Mac homepage. Adams installed and started using the first release of Mac OS X in the weeks leading up to his death. His last post to his own forum was in praise of Mac OS X and the possibilities of its Cocoa programming framework. He said it was \"awesome...\", which was also the last word he wrote on his site. \n\nAdams used email to correspond with Steve Meretzky in the early 1980s, during their collaboration on Infocom's version of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy . While living in New Mexico in 1993 he set up another e-mail address and began posting to his own USENET newsgroup, alt.fan.douglas-adams, and occasionally, when his computer was acting up, to the comp.sys.mac hierarchy. Challenges to the authenticity of his messages later led Adams to set up a message forum on his own website to avoid the issue. In 1996, Adams was a keynote speaker at the Microsoft Professional Developers Conference (PDC) where he described the personal computer as being a modelling device. The video of his keynote speech is archived on Channel 9 . Adams was also a keynote speaker for the April 2001 Embedded Systems Conference in San Francisco, one of the major technical conferences on embedded system engineering. \n\nAlthough there is no explicit admission to this effect, it is not uncommon to find claims in the media that the various Deep Thought , Deep Blue , and DeepMind are named after the Deep Thought supercomputer imagined by Adams. Elon Musk was among the first funders of DeepMind, and has often admitted that Adams was fundamental to its formation. According to Musk, Adams is the \"best philosopher ever\", and Hitchhiker's \"highlighted an important point which is that a lot of times the question is harder than the answer. And if you can properly phrase the question, then the answer is the easy part\". \n\nAdams moved to Upper Street , Islington in 1981 and to Duncan Terrace, a few minutes walk away, in the late 1980s. \n\nIn the early 1980s, Adams had a relationship with novelist Sally Emerson , who was separated from her husband at that time. Adams later dedicated his book Life, the Universe and Everything to Emerson. In 1981, Emerson returned to her husband, Peter Stothard , a contemporary of Adams at Brentwood School and later editor of The Times . Adams was soon introduced by friends to Jane Belson with whom he later became romantically involved.\n\nBelson was the \"lady barrister \" mentioned in the jacket-flap biography printed in his books during the mid-1980s (\"He [Adams] lives in Islington with a lady barrister and an Apple Macintosh\"). The two lived in Los Angeles together during 1983, while Adams worked on an early screenplay adaptation of Hitchhiker's . When the deal fell through, they moved back to London and after several separations (\"He is currently not certain where he lives, or with whom\") and a broken engagement, they married on 25 November 1991.\n\nAdams and Belson had one daughter together, Polly Jane Rocket Adams, born on 22 June 1994 shortly after Adams turned 42. In 1999, the family moved from London to Santa Barbara, California , where they lived until his death. Following the funeral, Jane Belson and Polly Adams returned to London. Belson died on 7 September 2011 of cancer, aged 59. \n\nAdams died of a heart attack due to undiagnosed coronary artery disease on 11 May 2001, aged 49, after resting from his regular workout at a private gym in Montecito, California . His funeral was held on 16 May in Santa Barbara. His ashes were placed in Highgate Cemetery in north London in June 2002. A memorial service was held on 17 September 2001 at St Martin-in-the-Fields church, Trafalgar Square , London. This became the first church service broadcast live on the web by the BBC. \n\nTwo days before Adams died, the Minor Planet Center announced the naming of asteroid 18610 Arthurdent , named after The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy protagonist. In 2005, the asteroid 25924 Douglasadams was named in his memory. \n\nIn May 2002, The Salmon of Doubt was published, containing many short stories, essays and letters as well as eulogies from Richard Dawkins , Stephen Fry (in the UK edition), Christopher Cerf (in the US edition), and Terry Jones (in the US paperback edition). It also includes eleven chapters of his unfinished novel, The Salmon of Doubt , which was originally intended to become a new Dirk Gently novel but might have later become the sixth Hitchhiker novel. \n\nOther events after Adams's death included a webcast production of Shada , allowing the complete story to be told, radio dramatisations of the final three books in the Hitchhiker's series and the completion of the film adaptation of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy . The film, released in 2005, posthumously credits Adams as a producer and several design elements – including a head-shaped planet seen near the end of the film – incorporated Adams's features.\n\nA 12-part radio series based on the Dirk Gently novels was announced in 2007. \n\nBBC Radio 4 also commissioned a third Dirk Gently radio series based on the incomplete chapters of The Salmon of Doubt and written by Kim Fuller ; but this was dropped in favour of a BBC-TV series based on the two completed novels. A sixth Hitchhiker novel, And Another Thing... , by Artemis Fowl author Eoin Colfer , was released on 12 October 2009 (the 30th anniversary of the first book), published with the support of Adams's estate. A BBC Radio 4 Book at Bedtime adaptation and an audio book soon followed.\n\nOn 25 May 2001, two weeks after Adams's death, his fans organised a tribute known as Towel Day , which has been observed every year since then. \n\nAn Apple Macintosh SE/30 once owned by Adams can be seen on display at The Centre for Computing History in Cambridge. \n\nIn 2018, John Lloyd presented an hour-long episode of the BBC Radio Four documentary Archive on 4 discussing Adams's private papers, which are held at St John's College, Cambridge . The episode is available online. \n\nTravessa Douglas Adams, a street at 27°35′21.8″S 48°39′44.0″W ﻿ / ﻿ 27.589389°S 48.662222°W ﻿ / -27.589389; -48.662222 ﻿ ( Travessa Douglas Adams ) in São José , Santa Catarina, Brazil, is named in Adams's honour. \n\nIn March 2021, Unbound announced a crowdfunder for 42: the wildly improbable ideas of Douglas Adams , on the 20th anniversary of his death, a book based on Adams's papers, edited by Kevin Jon Davies . \n\nThe annual Douglas Adams Memorial Lectures began in 2003. \n\nIncludes short stories, essays, and interviews by Adams\n\nOpen source, online, comic encyclopaedia\n\n4 stories with 13 episodes\n\nHe was also script editor throughout season 17",
  "The Pinacoteca di Brera (\" Brera Art Gallery \") is the main public gallery for paintings in Milan , Italy. It contains one of the foremost collections of Italian paintings from the 13th to the 20th century, an outgrowth of the cultural program of the Brera Academy , which shares the site in the Palazzo Brera .\n\nThe Palazzo Brera owes its name to the Germanic braida , indicating a grassy opening in the city structure: compare the Bra of Verona . The convent on the site passed to the Jesuits (1572), then underwent a radical rebuilding by Francesco Maria Richini (1627–28). When the Jesuits were disbanded in 1773, the palazzo remained the seat of the astronomical Observatory and the Braidense National Library founded by the Jesuits. In 1774 the herbarium of the new botanical garden was added. The buildings were extended to designs by Giuseppe Piermarini , who was appointed professor in the Academy when it was formally founded in 1776, with Giuseppe Parini as dean. Piermarini taught at the Academy for 20 years, while he was controller of the city's urbanistic projects, like the public gardens (1787–1788) and piazza Fontana (1780–1782).\n\nFor the better teaching of architecture, sculpture and the other arts, the Academy initiated by Parini was provided with a collection of casts after the Antique, an essential for inculcating a refined Neoclassicism in the students. Under Parini's successors, the abate Carlo Bianconi (1778–1802) and artist Giuseppe Bossi (1802–1807), the Academy acquired the first paintings of its Pinacoteca during the reassignment of works of Italian art that characterized the Napoleonic era . Raphael 's Sposalizio (the Marriage of the Virgin ) was the key painting of the early collection, and the Academy increased its cultural scope by taking on associates across the First French Empire : David , Pietro Benvenuti , Vincenzo Camuccini , Canova , Thorvaldsen and the archaeologist Ennio Quirino Visconti .\n\nIn 1805, under Bossi's direction, the series of annual exhibitions was initiated with a system of prizes, a counterpart of the Paris Salons , which served to identify Milan as the cultural capital for contemporary painting in Italy through the 19th century. The Academy's artistic committee, the Commissione di Ornato exercised a controlling influence on public monuments, a precursor of today's Sopraintendenze Delle Belle Arti.\n\nThe opening of the new \"Reale Pinacoteca\" was celebrated on 15 August 1809, Napoleon's birthday. The paintings were displayed in three of the four Napoleonic halls with pavilion vaults. Fundamental paintings by Bellini , Mantegna , Carpaccio , Titian , Veronese and Tintoretto had entered the gallery. \n\nThe Romantic era witnessed the triumph of academic history painting, guided at the Academy by Francesco Hayez , and the introduction of the landscape as an acceptable academic genre, inspired by Williamo's Davias and his more known cousin Giuseppe Bisi , while the Academy moved towards becoming an institution for teaching the history of art.\n\nIn 1882, the Paintings Gallery was separated from the Academy and Giuseppe Bertini was appointed as its first director. Bertini was succeeded by Corrado Ricci who, during his direction from 1898-1903, established the Photo Library and systematically reorganized the Picture Gallery according to schools and periods.\n\nIn 1903, the Pinacoteca opened 19 new rooms that allowed the exhibition of over 100 newly acquired works, such as Bramante 's frescoes from the Visconti Panigarola house. The art historian and critic Antonio Morassi, who served as director at the Pinacoteca from 1934 to 1939, opened up the collection to 19th century painting and a new exhibition dominated by paintings by Hayez was created. There was also a precursory opening to the purchase of 20th century paintings, such as Guttuso 's Portrait of Alberto Moravia and Mafai 's \"Modelli nello studio\". \n\nThe Brera Observatory hosted the astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli for four decades, and the Orto Botanico di Brera is a historic botanical garden located behind the Pinacoteca.\n\nIn 2024, the museum's modern art wing was opened at the Palazzo Citterio as part of efforts to showcase its modern art collection that had expanded following donations in the 1970s and 1980s and to mark the completion of the \"Grande Brera\" project to merge the Palazzo Citterio, the Pinacoteca di Brera, and the Braidense Library. ",
  "The body language of dogs is one form of non-verbal communication whereby dogs can express emotions and intentions through bodily movements. It refers to the interpretation of posture and behaviour of species in the genus Canis . This form of visual communication is generally used for identifying emotions and intentions of domestic dogs, though it can also be applied to wild canines such as wolves . Understanding the body language of dogs is particularly important in preventing dog bites, especially of children. This communication can occur between dogs, or during a dog-human interaction. Such movements primarily involve the tail, the ears, and the head/body. Tail-wagging is a common tail movement used by dogs to communicate. Additionally, ear flattening or heightening are typical movements made using the ears. In terms of the head/body, it is of interest to study turning of the head, as well as the overall posture of the dog. \n\nBecause dogs communicate differently from humans, it is more difficult for humans to interpret their emotional states. By focusing on the combinations of motions made by dogs, and studying the aftermath of such sequences, humans are able to attribute different emotional states (i.e., contentment , fear , or aggression ) as a result of the dog's body language. \n\nBy properly interpreting the body language of dogs, not only are humans able to decipher what a dog is trying to communicate, but are also able to recognize warning signs prior to an attack, decreasing the number of dog bite occurrences. \n\nIt is important to note that the body language under investigation can be divided into three different forms of cues: behavioural, holistic, and other. While behavioural cues focus primarily on studying movements without considering the underlying reasoning behind such movements, holistic cues are ones that occur as a result of either expressing emotions, or communicating intentions. \n\nUnderstanding the body language of dogs can also aid in optimal obedience training, as observation of body language may reveal when the dog is most motivated and therefore provides a time-frame whereby dogs will learn more readily. \n\nIn general, accurately assessing the body language of dogs is quite beneficial as it allows humans to react appropriately to emotions and intentions of the dog. Thus, it fosters successful companionship between the dog owner and pet. Alternatively, ignoring the body language of dogs can pose as a threat for not only humans, but for dogs too. \n\nProperly assessing body language can predict whether or not the dog will bite. Biting occurrences most often involve small children, where bites often affect facial areas. In comparison, bites in adults are less serious, usually involving extremities. Warning signals can be identified through evaluating the body language of dogs accordingly. Oftentimes, people struggle when identifying the body motions of a fearful/anxious dog, incorrectly associating the motions with behaviours of approachable/relaxed dogs. This misinterpretation is most often one that results in the occurrence of biting.\n\nMisreading the warning signs portrayed by dogs can also result in behavioural problems. Euthanasia can be avoided in cases where such behavioural issues occur due to humans ignoring the warning signs expressed by a dog. \n\nThe position and movement, or lack thereof, of a dog's head can indicate a variety of emotional states. If the head is stationary, the main identifying difference is whether the head is upright or lowered. An upright head signifies attentiveness , dominance , or aggression , while a lowered head signifies fear or submission . A moving head may indicate that a dog is feeling playful . \n\nA dog communicates by altering the position of its head. When the head is held in an erect position this could indicate that is approachable, attentive, curious, or aggressive. Turning the head away may indicate fear, but is also recognized as a calming signal. A dominant dog will display an upright posture and/or stiff legs. The head can be held in a high position convey being approachable, alert, aggressive, or displaying dominance.\n\nAnother common position is a tilted head. While the reason for this head positioning has not been determined, it has been suggested that this behaviour shows that a dog is trying to listen more effectively or is anticipating a reward. \n\nA dog's use of eye contact and eye movements can communicate emotions and intentions. Prolonged eye contact or staring are indicators of aggression, especially when combined with body stiffness. Avoiding eye contact, or looking down, is a submissive dog behaviour. \n\nDogs can express a range of emotions based on movements of the teeth and lips. In an aggressive dog, the lips curl back to expose clenched teeth, which warns others of their ferocity. Conversely, an open mouth showing unclenched teeth indicates that a dog is in a playful or relaxed mood. \n\nThe ears of a dog can express a variety of emotions based on their position or the direction they are facing. Ear positions are similar to head positions with respect to the feelings they display. Ears that are upright and facing forward indicate dominance or aggression, while ears that are pulled back and facing downward indicate fear or submission. Unfortunately, not all dogs are able to communicate with their ears. Breeds with drooping ears, cropped ears , or ears that are permanently erect are mostly or completely unable to use their ears to display emotions. \n\nThe position and movement of a dog's tail are another effective indicator of emotions and intentions. Tail wagging is one of the most common dog behaviours that is used to convey emotion, but wagging can signify different things depending on the nature of the movement. If a dog's tail is held high while it wags, this is indicative of dominance, however if the high tail moves in a stiff wagging motion, this is indicative of aggression. The tail being positioned low between the hind legs, usually stationary, is an indication of fear or submission. If a dog's tail is wagging freely and vigorously, this displays a friendly or playful mood. Similar to ear position, tail positions and movements may be mostly or completely ineffective in dog breeds with short, tightly curled, or docked tails. \n\nThe tail of a dog can communicate a number of emotions and intentions. Tail wagging by dogs is familiar to those who interact with them. When a dog wags its tail, most people interpret this as the dog expressing happiness and friendliness . Though indeed tail wagging can express these positive emotions, it can also be an indication of fear , insecurity , the challenging of dominance , or a warning sign that the dog may bite. Considerable effort has been put in to describing this aspect of dog behaviour, whereby it can now be broken down into two conditions: right-biased tail wagging, and left-biased tail wagging. Research has demonstrated that dogs display asymmetric tail wagging as a result of distinctive emotional stimuli. \n\nRight-biased tail wags are ones biased to the right side of a dog's body, as viewed from the rear. Studies show that dogs were relaxed when presented with a conspecific showing right-biased tail wagging, illustrating right-biased tail wagging as communicating positive feelings, or demonstrate an approach response. Moreover, dogs show this tail-wagging behaviour upon presentation of their owner. \n\nLeft-biased tail wags are ones biased to the left side of a dog's body, as viewed from the rear. Dogs that were presented with a conspecific displaying this tail wagging behaviour were more stressed (revealed through heightened cardiac activity as well as behaviour) in comparison to dogs presented with conspecifics showing right-biased tail wagging behaviour. This increased emotional response suggest that left-biased tail wagging communicates negative feelings, or demonstrates a withdrawal response. Furthermore, dogs show this tail wagging behaviour in the presence of an unfamiliar, dominant conspecific. \n\nA slow-wagging tail is quite different than a high-speed wagging tail. The former display commonly denotes a less social signal, whereas the latter often signifies sociality in dogs. \n\nAnalysing a dog's body as a whole unit is important in determining a dog's emotions. A standing, upright position can indicate dominance, or suggests aggression if the body is stiff. A withdrawn body position with weight distributed to the hind end of a dog suggests fear. The difference between active submission and passive submission can be discerned based on a dog's posture; active submission is demonstrated by keeping the body low to the ground, while passive submission is demonstrated by lying on the ground with the underbelly exposed. \n\nA dog can alter its body position so that the front of the body is in a crouched position with the front legs lower than the back legs. This can indicate a higher level of aggression that can be the precursor to an attack. If this position is accompanied by snarling, a wrinkled nose, dilated pupils, the tail tucked under the body and between the back legs, and raised hair along the dog's back, the dog is highly aggressive and fearful. In comparison, submissiveness may be revealed by lowering the body or rolling onto the side, revealing the underbelly. \n\nA variety of behaviours exhibited by dogs can be interpreted to convey certain emotions. A well-known behaviour associated with playful moods in dogs is known as a play bow, where a dog lowers its forelimbs and chest while raising its hind end and wagging its tail. This may be followed with other playful actions, such as bouncing movements and face pawing. In young dogs, urination can be a behaviour associated with submission. This occurs when eye contact is made between a dog and its owner, followed by the dog urinating in an attempt to gain approval. Depending on the dog, breed, and environment, these actions can vary and are frequently instinctive. Knowing these indicators can make it easier for pet owners to interact with their animals and identify when a dog is pleased, anxious, or threatened. \n\nA relaxed dog will display upward ear position, with the tail positioned downward. In comparison, an anxious or fearful dog will display a tense body posture, backward position of the ears, head turning, and/or lip smacking. The tail may also be tucked between the hind legs. Finally, an aggressive dog will display a stiff tail (which may be wagging slowly), a forward ear position, as well as a wrinkled nose. If these characteristics are present, it is very important to respond accordingly in order to avoid attack. Aggression may occur if an inappropriate response is made following warning signals. For example, children often misinterpret the body language of dogs, especially when such motions precede an aggressive behaviour. The calming signals are often not noticed or not interpreted correctly to recognize early signs of stress in a dog. As a result of these misinterpretations, children are most often the victims of dog bites. \n\nPuppies have other postures that disappear as the dog ages. They can play roughly with their litter mates while rarely drawing blood. The mother remains very tolerant when the puppies chew on her. \n\nBehavioral cues are simply signals that are communicated through the behavior of a dog. These include specific movements involving the body posture, the ears, the head/eyes, and the tail. Behavioral cues are simply assessing the movements of a dog, without considering the emotions and/or intentions underlying such movements. For example, tail wagging is a behavioral cue.\n\nHolistic cues are approximate evaluations of the observed overall state of the animal. Holistic cues can be subdivided into two categories: emotional, and intentional. Consistent with recent research that suggests a dog's ability to feel happy, angry, or sad, emotional cues intend to describe the dog's feelings regarding a certain situation. For example, assuming that a dog is fearful based primarily on the position of the tail. Intentional cues are ones that are expressed through body language that communicate the overall intention of the dog. These are cues that reveal why the animal is acting a certain way. For example, the display of a play-bow posture may be described as occurring in order to initiate play (an intention). \n\nOther cues are any type of cue that is not behavioral or holistic. These include miscellaneous cues, or the overall absence of cues. \n\nUnderstanding and properly interpreting the characteristics displayed by dogs during learning can significantly aid in successive obedience training. As human-dog interactions occur quite frequently, a lack of obedience training can lead to unwanted behavioural problems. Thus, it is very important for effective training to occur.\n\nSuccessful training in dogs requires the owner/trainer to be able to correctly interpret the learning abilities of the dog. It is well established that body language can reveal emotions and moods of dogs, which can be quite helpful when assessing dogs during training.\n\nStudies have shown that the obedience training of domestic dogs can be explained using operant conditioning methods. Like humans, concentration as well as motivation must be present in order for learning to occur. Therefore, understanding the dog's motivation and emotional states may result in more successful training. Attention to others can be assessed in dogs by measuring the amount of eye contact made with the trainer, as well as the position of the ears. It has been found that dogs that make eye contact with the trainer, as well as display a forward ear position, are most successful in learning achievement during operant conditioning. ",
  "Victor Hasselblad (8 March 1906 – 5 August 1978) was a Swedish inventor and photographer, known for inventing the Hasselblad 6x6 cm medium format camera .\n\nHasselblad was born in Gothenburg . In 1940 Swedish Air Force officers requested Hasselblad to construct a camera that rivaled the one found in a German reconnaissance aircraft shot down over Sweden. Hasselblad founded the Victor Hasselblad AB company in 1941 to produce cameras for the Swedish Air Force .\n\nHasselblad was famous for always trying out Hasselblad AB's new camera models by photographing birds. For example, Hasselblad 2000 was tried a week at Nidingen , the only place in Sweden where the black-legged kittiwake nests. \n\nBy 1948, the company introduced the first civilian Hasselblad camera, the 1600F, in New York City. Over time, Hasselblad has become a standard camera for many professional photographers.\n\nOn his death, Hasselblad willed SEK 78 million (US$8 million) to the Erna and Victor Hasselblad Foundation .\n\nIn 1980 Hasselblad was posthumously inducted into the International Photography Hall of Fame and Museum . \n\nThis article about a European photographer is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .\n\nThis Swedish biographical article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Rodrigo y Gabriela ( [roˈð̞ɾi.ɣ̞o i ɡaˈβ̞ɾje.la] , \"Rodrigo and Gabriela\") are a Mexican acoustic guitar duo featuring musicians Rodrigo Sánchez and Gabriela Quintero. Residing in Mexico City, they began their career in Dublin, Ireland , where they played for the first eight-years of their career as a duo. Their music consists largely of instrumental duets on the flamenco guitar , with a musical style influenced by a number of genres including nuevo flamenco , rock , and heavy metal .\n\nThey have released numerous studio albums, including Mettavolution in 2020 which won a Grammy Award for the Best Contemporary Instrumental Album at the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards . Their most recent album, In Between Thoughts…A New World , was released in April 2023. They have toured internationally and performed at venues that include Red Rocks Amphitheatre and for President Barack Obama at The White House .\n\nRodrigo Sánchez (born 9 January 1974) and Gabriela Quintero (born 11 June 1973) grew up in middle-class families in Mexico City . Their parents listened to flamenco , jazz , and rock music , and they both enjoyed heavy metal bands like Metallica , which later proved influential to Rodrigo and Gabriela. \n\nSànchez and Quintero met at the age of 15, at 'la casa de la cultura' (house of culture) in Mexico City, where Sànchez's brother was the director. Quintero was in a drama class and at the suggestion of Sànchez brother, he met up with her. She remembers \"this 15-year-old boy there, dressed in a black ... with messy hair. Yet he was different to the other metal-heads his age: he seemed very serious and didn't drink or smoke\". The two bonded over their interest in music and they soon became a couple. \n\nIn the early 1990s, Sánchez formed a heavy metal band called Tierra Ácida (Acid Earth) with his brother. Quintero joined them in 1993 \"as they couldn't get a guitarist who would please Rodrigo\". When a record deal for the band fell through in 1997, Sánchez and Quintero left Mexico City for the resort town of Ixtapa on the Pacific coast of Mexico. They played in beach-side bars and hotels for nine months where \"we wanted to play a different kind of music, something we could make as our own\". \n\nSánchez and Quintero dated for many years before ending their relationship (but not their musical partnership) in 2012. \"We're now better friends by far,\" said Quintero. \"We no longer behave like 15-year-olds and it's allowed us to grow up.\" \n\nGrowing frustrated with the limited scope of the domestic Mexican rock scene, the duo moved to Europe . After travelling around, they took up residence in Dublin , Ireland , in 1999, despite not speaking any English. Playing live gigs in various pubs and busking on Grafton Street where they began to play \"many cover songs, which we enjoyed. Then we began to put in our own songs, and we've built up our repertoire from there\". They became friends with fellow musician Damien Rice who invited them to open for several of his shows. He also introduced the duo to Niall Muckian , who became their manager. In the first half of 2001 they recorded a 9-track demo called Foc of their own material supplemented by some covers, also featuring an appearance by Zoe Conway. \n\nAs interest in the band grew, it was decided to re-record the songs on the demo as re-Foc in 2002 with a number of friends, including Lisa Hannigan who provided vocal stylings and Conway, who by now also was a feature of the live set-up of the duo. The album appeared on Muckian's own Rubyworks Records as he found that \"because it is all instrumental, we found it hard to get major-label interest or any radio-play, so I put it out myself\". As interest grew, the duo were offered further support-slots, which resulted in an eight-track live-album recorded in Dublin and Manchester, released in 2004. They toured with David Grey on his 2005 European tour, leading to a record deal with ATO Records the same year. \n\nThe eponymous album, Rodrigo y Gabriela , entered the Irish Albums Chart at #1 beating Arctic Monkeys and Johnny Cash to the top spot. It was released internationally on March 13, 2006, having been given an earlier Irish release. Rodrigo y Gabriela , which was produced by John Leckie , includes covers of Led Zeppelin 's \" Stairway to Heaven \" and Metallica 's \"Orion\". The duo lists Metallica as being among their key influences, alongside other heavy metal bands such as Megadeth , Slayer , Testament and Overkill . The other tracks are original works inspired by the places they have been and the people they have met.\n\nThe duo had their national American TV debut on Late Show with David Letterman on December 18, 2006, performing \"Diablo Rojo\". Their song \"Tamacun\" featured in the pilot episode of AMC 's Breaking Bad in January 2008. Live in Japan was released on October 20, 2008, in the United Kingdom, and includes 14 tracks, and a bonus DVD containing five videos. The Led Zeppelin cover can be found on the album Rhythms del Mundo Classics . Their feature on MTV gave them a huge boost in popularity in the United States. This led to a feature on Nightmare Revisited , a tribute album to Danny Elfman's music from Tim Burton's The Nightmare Before Christmas . The duo performed an instrumental version of \"Oogie Boogie's Song\".\n\nThey released a new album, 11:11 , in September, 2009. Alex Skolnick of Testament guests on the album, as do Strunz & Farah . Upon the release of the new album, they received much mainstream American popularity and were the featured music on Monday Night Football on October 12, 2009, as they celebrated Latino Heritage Month .\n\nTheir song \"Santo Domingo\" was chosen as the Starbucks iTunes Pick of the Week for November 10, 2009. The duo was the musical guest on The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson that aired on CBS-TV on October 28, 2009, and was re-run on December 29, 2009. They performed \"Buster Voodoo\". They performed on Jools Holland 's Annual Hootenanny on December 31, 2009. \n\nThe duo was the musical guest on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno that aired on NBC on March 23, 2010, to promote their album 11:11 and on Lopez Tonight which aired on TBS March 25, 2010. They headlined the West Holts stage on the Sunday night at Glastonbury 2010 and played the King Tuts Tent at T In The Park on 10 July 2010. They also had a spot on the main stage at Latitude festival that same July and they managed to draw in a huge crowd. They also performed at The White House for President Barack Obama in 2010. \n\nIn 2010, Rodrigo y Gabriela contributed a live version of their song \"Hora Zero\" to the Enough Project and Downtown Records ' Raise Hope for Congo compilation. Proceeds from the compilation fund efforts to make the protection and empowerment of Congo's women a priority, as well as inspire individuals around the world to raise their voice for peace in the Congo.\n\nThey played the Nice Jazz Festival on 23 July 2010, and the McMenamin's Edgefield outdoor concert in Portland, Oregon on August 14, 2010, as well as the Ravinia Festival on August 28, 2010, and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on September 30, 2010. In September, 2010, the duo announced a hiatus from touring due to stress injuries caused by Gabriela's heavily percussive style of playing. However, they did manage to play five sold-out nights at Shepherd's Bush in London .\n\nOn January 20, 2011, Rodrigo y Gabriela entered the studio with Hans Zimmer to write and record sessions of the score from Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides . The soundtrack was released on May 17, 2011, three days before the film's general release. On July 9, 2011, Rodrigo Y Gabriela performed a live set for Guitar Center Sessions on DirecTV . The episode included an interview with program host, Nic Harcourt . On July 25, 2011, Rodrigo y Gabriela released another live album entitled Live in France . Rodrigo y Gabriela were featured in the 2011 DreamWorks film Puss in Boots , scored by Henry Jackman . During 2011, Rodrigo y Gabriela recorded in Havana, Cuba , with C.U.B.A., a 13-piece Cuban orchestra, and special guest musicians ( Anoushka Shankar on sitar and Le Trio Joubran on oud).\n\nIn January 2012, they released Area 52 , their first album backed by other musicians. The tracks on the album are mostly re-worked versions of songs that have appeared on their duo albums, Rodrigo y Gabriela and 11:11 . Reviews were mixed, with some tracks criticised for the backing band drowning out the guitar work that fans love but others praised where the guitar workouts \"are allowed space to breathe by lighter salsa-style backing\". \n\nIn January 2013, the duo appeared on an episode of the hour-long PBS music program Austin City Limits , which showed them in performance at the Moody Theater in Austin, Texas .\n\nIn April 2014, Rodrigo y Gabriela released their fourth studio album, entitled 9 Dead Alive , their first original studio album since 2009. They also toured internationally playing at venues such as Royal Albert Hall , Glastonbury Festival 2014 , and the Montreux Jazz Festival . They played at the Sydney Opera House in 2015 and marked their first performance in India at the 2015 Bacardi NH7 Weekender Festival . Rodrigo y Gabriela toured with John Mayer in 2017, opening for his The Search for Everything World Tour in South America. \n\nTheir fifth studio album Mettavolution was released by ATO Records on April 26, 2019 and includes a cover of the Pink Floyd song \" Echoes \". They also performed the song on Jimmy Kimmel Live! the same year. In January 2020, Mettavolution won a Grammy Award for 'Best Contemporary Instrumental Album' 62nd Annual Grammy Awards . The song peaked at No. 2 on the Billboard's Rock Albums chart and No. 10 on the Top Albums chart . \n\nIn 2021, the duo contributed a cover of the Metallica song \"The Struggle Within\" to the charity tribute album The Metallica Blacklist . The cover earned them a Grammy nomination for \"Best Arrangement, Instrumental Or A Cappella.\" They also signed with Shelter Music Group for management in 2021. \n\nIn 2023, Rodrigo y Gabriela played Austin City Limits with the Austin City Orchestra . This was the first time Austin City Limits featured the orchestra. They performed with Jools Holland's Rhythm and Blues Orchestra the same year. \n\nRodrigo y Gabriela released their sixth studio album, In Between Thoughts…A New World , on April 21, 2023. They had a world tour the same year to promote the album, playing in venues such as Red Rocks Amphitheatre , Auditorium Parco della Musica , and at the 2023 Montreal International Jazz Festival . \n\nFoc (April 2001) ",
  "A terrestrial plant is a plant that grows on, in or from land . Other types of plants are aquatic (living in or on water), semiaquatic (living at edge or seasonally in water), epiphytic (living on other plants), and lithophytic (living in or on rocks).\n\nThe distinction between aquatic and terrestrial plants is often blurred because many terrestrial plants are able to tolerate periodic submersion and many aquatic species have both submersed and emersed forms. There are relatively few obligate submersed aquatic plants (species that cannot tolerate emersion for even relatively short periods), but some examples include members of Hydrocharitaceae and Cabombaceae , Ceratophyllum , and Aldrovanda , and most macroalgae (e.g. Chara and Nitella ). Most aquatic plants can, or prefer to, grow in the emersed form, and most only flower in that form. Many terrestrial plants can tolerate extended periods of inundation, and this is often part of the natural habitat of the plant where flooding is common. These plants (termed helophytes ) tolerate extended periods of waterlogging around the roots and even complete submersion under flood waters. Growth rates of helophytes decrease significantly during these periods of complete submersion and if water levels do not recede the plant will ultimately decline and perish. ",
  "The term built environment refers to human-made conditions and is often used in architecture , landscape architecture , urban planning , public health , sociology , and anthropology , among others. These curated spaces provide the setting for human activity and were created to fulfill human desires and needs. The term can refer to a plethora of components including the traditionally associated buildings, cities , public infrastructure, transportation , open space, as well as more conceptual components like farmlands , dammed rivers, wildlife management , and even domesticated animals . \n\nThe built environment is made up of physical features. However, when studied, the built environment often highlights the connection between physical space and social consequences. It impacts the environment and how society physically maneuvers and functions, as well as less tangible aspects of society such as socioeconomic inequity and health. Various aspects of the built environment contribute to scholarship on housing and segregation , physical activity, food access, climate change , and environmental racism . \n\nThere are multiple different components that make up the built environment. Below are some prominent examples of what makes up the urban fabric:\n\nBuildings are used for a multitude of purposes: residential, commercial, community, institutional, and governmental. Building interiors are often designed to mediate external factors and provide space to conduct activities, whether that is to sleep, eat, work, etc. The structure of the building helps define the space around it, giving form to how individuals move through the space around the building.\n\nPublic infrastructure covers a variety of things like roads, highways, pedestrian circulation, public transportation, and parks.\n\nRoads and highways are an important feature of the built environment that enable vehicles to access a wide range of urban and non urban spaces. They are often compared to the arteries and veins of a cardiovascular system insofar as they circulate people and materials throughout a city similar to how arteries and veins circulate molecules like oxygen, glucose, and hormones between the heart and the cells, which is required for cell survival and optimal functioning. . Pedestrian circulation is vital for the walkability of a city and general access on a human scale. The quality of sidewalks and walkways have an impact on safety and accessibility for those using these spaces. Public transportation is essential in urban areas, particularly in cities and areas that have a diverse population and income range.\n\nAgricultural production accounts for roughly 52% of U.S. land use. Not only does population growth cause an expansion of cities, it also necessitates more agriculture to accommodate the demand for food for an expanding population.\n\n\"Built environment\" as a term was coined in the 1980s, becoming widespread in the 1990s and places the concept in direct contrast to the supposedly \"unbuilt\" environment. The term describes a wide range of fields that form an interdisciplinary concept that has been accepted as an idea since classical antiquity and potentially before. Through the study of anthropology , the progression of the built environment into what it is today has been able to be examined. When people are able to travel outside of urban centers and areas where the built environment is already prominent, it pushes the boundaries of said built environment into new areas. While there are other factors that influence the built environment, like advancements in architecture or agriculture, transportation allowed for the spread and expansion of the built environment.\n\nAgriculture, the cultivation of soil to grow crops and animals to provide food as well as products, was first developed about 12,000 years ago. This switch, also called the Neolithic Revolution , was the beginning of favoring permanent settlements and altering the land to grow crops and farm animals. This can be thought of as the start of the built environment, the first attempt to make permanent changes to the surrounding environment for human needs. The first appearance of cities was around 7500 BCE, dotted along where land was fertile and good for agricultural use. In these early communities, a priority was to ensure basic needs were being met. The built environment, while not as extensive as it is today, was beginning to be cultivated with the implementation of buildings, paths, farm land, domestication of animals and plants, etc. Over the next several thousand years, these smaller cities and villages grew into larger ones where trade, culture, education, and economics were driving factors. As cities began to grow, they needed to accommodate more people, as well as shifted from focusing on meeting survival needs to prioritizing comfort and desires – there are still many individuals today who do not have their basic needs met and this idea of a shift is within the framework of the evolution of society. This shift caused the built aspect of these cities to grow and expand to meet the growing population needs.\n\nThe pinnacle of city growth was during the Industrial Revolution due to the demand for jobs created by the rise in factories. Cities rapidly grew from the 1880s to the early 1900s within the United States. This demand led individuals to move from farms to cities which resulted in the need to expand city infrastructure and created a boom in population size. This rapid growth in population in cities led to issues of noise, sanitation, health problems, traffic jams, pollution, compact living quarters, etc. In response to these issues, mass transit, trolleys, cable cars, and subways, were built and prioritized in an effort to improve the quality of the built environment. An example of this during the industrial revolution was the City Beautiful movement . The City Beautiful movement emerged in the 1890s as a result of the disorder and unhealthy living conditions within industrial cities. The movement promoted improved circulation, civic centers, better sanitation, and public spaces. With these improvements, the goal was to improve the quality of life for those living in them, as well as make them more profitable. The City Beautiful movement, while declined in popularity over the years, provided a range of urban reforms. The movement highlighted city planning, civic education, public transportation, and municipal housekeeping. \n\nThe invention of cars, as well as train usage, became more accessible to the general masses due to the advancements in the steel, chemicals, and fuel generated production. In the 1920s, cars became more accessible to the general public due to Henry Ford's advances in the assembly line production. With this new burst of personal transportation, new infrastructure was built to accommodate. Freeways were first built in 1956 to attempt to eliminate unsafe roads, traffic jams, and insufficient routes. The creation of freeways and interstate transportation systems opened up the possibility and ease of transportation outside a person's city. This allowed ease of travel not previously found and changed the fabric of the built environment. New streets were being built within cities to accommodate cars as they became increasingly popular, railway lines were being built to connect areas not previously connected, for both public transportation as well as goods transportation. With these changes, the scope of a city began to expand outside its borders. The widespread use of cars and public transportation allowed for the implementation of suburbs; the working individual was able to commute long distances to work everyday. Suburbs blurred the line of city \"borders\", the day-to-day life that may have originally been relegated to a pedestrian radius now encompassed a wide range of distances due to the use of cars and public transportation. This increased accessibility allowed for the continued expansion of the built environment.\n\nCurrently, the built environment is typically used to describe the interdisciplinary field that encompasses the design, construction, management, and use of human-made physical influence as an interrelated whole. The concept also includes the relationship of these elements of the built environment with human activities over time—rather than a particular element in isolation or at a single moment in time, these aspects act together via the multiplier effect. The field today draws upon areas such as economics , law, public policy , sociology , anthropology , public health, management , geography , design, engineering, technology, and environmental sustainability to create a large umbrella that is the built environment. \n\nThere are some in modern academia who look at the built environment as all-encompassing, that there is no natural environment left. This argument comes from the idea that the built environment not only refers to that which is built, arranged, or curated, but also to what is managed, controlled, or allowed to continue. What is referred to as \"nature\" today can be seen as only a commodity that is placed into an environment that is constructed to fulfill the human will and desire. This commodity allows humans to enjoy the view and experience of nature without it inconveniencing their day-to-day life. It can be argued that the forests and wild-life parks that are held on a pedestal and are seemingly natural are in reality curated and allowed to exist for the enjoyment of the human experience. The planet has been irrevocably changed by human interaction. Wildlife has been hunted, harvested, brought to the brink of extinction, modified to fit human needs, the list goes on. This argument juxtaposes the argument that the built environment is only what is built, that the forests, oceans, wildlife, and other aspects of nature are their own entity.\n\nThe term built environment encompasses a broad range of categories, all of which have potential impacts. When looking at these potential impacts, the environment, as well as people, are heavily affected.\n\nThe built environment can heavily impact the public's health. Historically, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding within cities and urban environments have led to infectious diseases and other health threats. Dating back to Georges-Eugene Haussmann 's comprehensive plans for urban Paris in the 1850s, concern for lack of air-flow and sanitary living conditions has inspired many strong city planning efforts. During the 19th century in particular, the connection between the built environment and public health became more apparent as life expectancy decreased and diseases, as well as epidemics, increased. Today, the built environment can expose individuals to pollutants or toxins that cause chronic diseases like asthma , diabetes , and coronary vascular disease, along with many others. There is evidence to suggest that chronic disease can be reduced through healthy behaviors like a proper active lifestyle, good nutrition, and reduced exposure to toxins and pollutants. Yet, the built environment is not always designed to facilitate those healthy behaviors. Many urban environments, in particular suburbs, are automobile reliant, making it difficult or unreasonable to walk or bike to places. This condition not only adds to pollution, but can also make it hard to maintain a proper active lifestyle. Public health research has expanded the list of concerns associated with the built environment to include healthy food access , community gardens , mental health , physical health , walkability , and cycling mobility . Designing areas of cities with good public health is linked to creating opportunities for physical activity, community involvement, and equal opportunity within the built environment. Urban forms that encourage physical activity and provide adequate public resources for involvement and upward mobility are proven to have far healthier populations than those that discourage such uses of the built environment. \n\nFeatures in the built environment present physical barriers which constitute the boundaries between neighborhoods . Roads and railways , for instance, play a large role in how people can feasibly navigate their environment. This can result in the isolation of certain communities from various resources and from each other. The placement of roads, highways, and sidewalks also determines what access people have to jobs and childcare close to home, especially in areas where most people do not own vehicles. Walkability directly influences community, so the way a neighborhood is built affects the outcomes and opportunities of the community that lives there. Even less physically imposing features, such as architectural design , can distinguish the boundaries between communities and decrease movement across neighborhood lines. \n\nThe segregation of communities is significant because the qualities of any given space directly impact the wellbeing of the people who live and work there. George Galster and Patrick Sharkey refer to this variation in geographic context as \"spatial opportunity structure\", and claim that the built environment influences socioeconomic outcomes and general welfare. For instance, the history of redlining and housing segregation means that there is less green space in many Black and Hispanic neighborhoods. Access to parks and green space has been proven to be good for mental health which puts these communities at a disadvantage. The historical segregation has contributed to environmental injustice, as these neighborhoods suffer from hotter summers since urban asphalt absorbs more heat than trees and grass. The effects of spatial segregation initiatives in the built environment, such as redlining in the 1930s and 1940s, are long lasting. The inability to feasibly move from forcibly economically depressed areas into more prosperous ones creates fiscal disadvantages that are passed down generationally. With proper public education access tied to the economic prosperity of a neighborhood, many formerly redlined areas continue to lack educational opportunities for residents and, thus, job and higher-income opportunities are limited. \n\nThe built environment has a multitude of impacts on the planet, some of the most prominent effects are greenhouse gas emissions and Urban Heat Island Effect. \n\nThe built environment expands along with factors like population and consumption which directly impact the output of greenhouse gases. As cities and urban areas grow, the need for transportation and structures grows as well. In 2006, transportation accounted for 28% of total greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S. Building's design, location, orientation, and construction process heavily influence greenhouse gas emissions. Commercial, industrial, and residential buildings account for roughly 43% of U.S. CO 2 emissions in energy usage. In 2005, agricultural land use accounted for 10–12% of total human-caused greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. \n\nUrban heat islands are pockets of higher temperature areas, typically within cities, that effect the environment, as well as quality of life. Urban Heat Islands are caused by reduction of natural landscape in favor of urban materials like asphalt, concrete, brick, etc. This change from natural landscape to urban materials is the epitome of the built environment and its expansion.",
  "Max Reinhardt ( German: [maks ˈʁaɪnhaʁt] ⓘ ; born Maximilian Goldmann ; 9 September 1873 – 30 October 1943) was an Austrian-born theatre and film director , intendant , and theatrical producer . With his radically innovative and avant-garde stage productions, Reinhardt is regarded as one of the most prominent stage directors of the early 20th century.\n\nFor example, Reinhardt's 1917 stage premiere of Reinhard Sorge 's Kleist Prize -winning stage play Der Bettler almost single-handedly gave birth to Expressionism in the theatre and ultimately in motion pictures as well. In 1920, Reinhardt established the Salzburg Festival by directing an open air production of Hugo von Hofmannsthal 's acclaimed adaptation of the Everyman Medieval mystery play in the square before the Cathedral with the Alps as a background. This remains an annual custom at the Salzburg Festival to this day.\n\nToby Cole and Helen Krich Chinoy have dubbed Reinhardt, \"one of the most picturesque actor-directors of modern times\", and write that his eventual arrival in the United States as a refugee from the imminent Nazi takeover of Austria followed a long and distinguished career, \"inspired by the example of social participation in the ancient Greek and Medieval theatres \", of seeking, \"to bridge the separation between actors and audiences\". \n\nIn 1935, Reinhardt directed his first and only motion picture in the United States through Warner Brothers , the Expressionist film adaptation of William Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night's Dream , starring Mickey Rooney , Olivia De Havilland , and James Cagney . The film was banned by the Ministry of Propaganda in an infamous example of censorship in Nazi Germany . This was due not only to Joseph Goebbels ' belief that Expressionism was degenerate art , but even more so due to the Jewish ancestry of director Max Reinhardt, Classical music composer Felix Mendelssohn , and soundtrack arranger Erich Wolfgang Korngold ; whose work was already banned by Goebbels as allegedly degenerate music . \n\nReinhardt also founded the highly influential drama schools Hochschule für Schauspielkunst \"Ernst Busch\" in Berlin, Max Reinhardt Seminar , the Max Reinhardt Workshop ( Sunset Boulevard ), and the Max Reinhardt Junior Workshop. Even though Reinhardt did not live long enough to witness the end of Nazism in 1945, his formerly expropriated estate at Schloss Leopoldskron near Salzburg was restored to his widow and his legacy continues to be celebrated and honoured in the modern Germanosphere for his many radically innovative contributions to the performing arts .\n\nReinhardt was born Maximilian Goldmann in the spa town of Baden bei Wien , to Jewish parents Rachel Lea Rosi \"Rosa\" Goldmann and her husband Wilhelm Goldmann, a merchant from Stupava, Slovakia . Having finished school, he began an apprenticeship at a bank, but already took acting lessons.\n\nIn 1890, he gave his debut on a private stage in Vienna with the stage name Max Reinhardt (possibly after the protagonist Reinhard Werner in Theodor Storm 's novella Immensee ). In 1893 he performed at the re-opened Salzburg City Theatre . One year later, Reinhardt relocated to Germany , joining the Deutsches Theater ensemble under director Otto Brahm in Berlin. \n\nReinhardt was one of the contributors of the Swedish avant-garde theatre magazine Thalia between 1910 and 1913. In 1918 Reinhardt purchased Schloss Leopoldskron castle in Salzburg. \n\nIn October 1922 Reinhardt was in the audience when The Dybbuk was staged by the Vilna Troupe at the Roland Theater in Vienna. Reinhardt rushed backstage and congratulated the actors. At the time he was already recognized in Austria as distinguished theater director. A couple of months before his endorsement for The Dybbuk , Reinhardt had again successfully staged Jedermann (Everyman) for the Salzburg Festival . \n\nReinhardt fled due to the Nazis' increasing anti-Semitic aggressions. The castle was seized following Germany's Anschluss annexation of Austria in 1938. After the war, the castle was restored to Reinhardt's heirs, and subsequently the home and grounds became famous as the filming site for the early scenes of the Von Trapp family gardens in the movie The Sound of Music .\n\nIn 1901, Reinhardt together with Friedrich Kayßler and several other theatre colleagues founded the Schall und Rauch (Sound and Smoke) Kabarett stage in Berlin. Re-opened as Kleines Theater (Little Theatre) it was the first of numerous stages where Reinhardt worked as a director until the beginning of Nazi rule in 1933. From 1903 to 1905, he managed the Neues Theater (present-day Theater am Schiffbauerdamm ) and in 1906 acquired the Deutsches Theater in Berlin. In 1911, he premiered with Karl Vollmöller 's The Miracle in Olympia , London, gaining an international reputation. \n\nIn 1910, Siegfried Jacobsohn wrote his book entitled Max Reinhardt . In 1914, he was persuaded to sign the Manifesto of the Ninety-Three , defending the German invasion of Belgium . He was signatory 66; he later expressed regret at signing. [ citation needed ]\n\nFrom 1915 to 1918, Reinhardt also worked as director of the Volksbühne theatre.\n\nOn 23 December 1917, Reinhardt presided over the world premiere of Reinhard Sorge 's Kleist Prize -winning stage play Der Bettler , which had long been, \"a succès de scandale , an innovation, changing the course of theatrical history with its revolutionary staging techniques\". \n\nAccording to Michael Paterson, \"The genius of the 20-year old Sorge already showed the possibilities of abstract staging, and Reinhardt in 1917, simply by following Sorge's stage directions, was to become the first director to present a play in wholly Expressionist style.\" \n\nAccording to Michael Paterson, \"The play opens with an ingenious inversion: the Poet and Friend converse in front of a closed curtain, behind which voices can be heard. It appears that we, the audience, are backstage and the voices are those of the imagined audience out front. It is a simple, but disorienting trick of stagecraft, whose imaginative spatial reversal is self-consciously theatrical. So the audience is alerted to the fact that they are about to see a play and not a 'slice of life'.\" \n\nAccording to Walter H. Sokel, \"The lighting apparatus behaves like the mind. It drowns in darkness what it wishes to forget and bathes in light what it wishes to recall. Thus the entire stage becomes a universe of [the] mind, and the individual scenes are not replicas of three-dimensional physical reality, but visualizes stages of thought.\" \n\nReinhardt's production of the play, which he had meticulously planned ever since he had purchased the rights from Sorge in 1913, proved enormously popular and productions immediately began to be staged in other German cities, such as Cologne . After the 1918 Armistice, newspapers in the German language in the United States also published articles highly praising Reinhardt's production of the play, which singlehandedly gave birth to Expressionism in the theatre. \n\nAfter the November Revolution of 1918 , Reinhardt re-opened the Großes Schauspielhaus (after World War II renamed into Friedrichstadtpalast ) in 1919, following its expressionist conversion by Hans Poelzig . By 1930, he ran eleven stages in Berlin and, in addition, managed the Theater in der Josefstadt in Vienna from 1924 to 1933.\n\nIn 1920, Reinhardt established the Salzburg Festival with Richard Strauss and Hugo von Hofmannsthal , always directing the annual production of Hoffmansthal's acclaimed adaptation of the Medieval Dutch morality play Everyman , in which the Christian God sends Death to summon an archetype of the Human Race to Judgment Day. In the United States, he successfully directed The Miracle in 1924, and a popular stage version of Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night's Dream in 1927. [ citation needed ]\n\nFrom the 1910s to the early 1930s, one of Reinhardt's most frequent collaborators was the Swedish-born American composer and conductor Einar Nilson [ sv ] , whom he employed as the music department head of his theaters; during international trips, Nilson would also serve as an advance man for Reinhardt, traveling ahead to the next performance location to audition singers and actors. Reinhardt, moreover, often would utilize existing music by famous composers (for example, Mozart and Mendelssohn ) for his productions, which Nilson would arrange to meet Reinhardt's needs. Nilson also composed original music, such as the incidental music for Hofmannsthal's Jedermann . \n\nReinhardt followed that success by directing a film version of A Midsummer Night's Dream in 1935 using a mostly different cast, that included James Cagney , Mickey Rooney , Joe E. Brown and Olivia de Havilland , amongst others. Rooney and de Havilland had also appeared in Reinhardt's 1934 stage production, which was staged at the Hollywood Bowl . The Nazis banned the film because of the Jewish ancestry of both Reinhardt and Felix Mendelssohn, whose music (arranged by Erich Wolfgang Korngold ) was used throughout the film.\n\nAfter the Anschluss of Austria to Nazi-governed Germany in 1938, he emigrated first to Britain, then to the United States. In 1940, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States. At that time, he was married to his second wife, actress Helene Thimig , daughter of actor Hugo Thimig and sister of actors Hans and Hermann Thimig . \n\nBy employing powerful staging techniques, and integrating stage design , language , music and choreography , Reinhardt introduced new dimensions into German theatre. The Max Reinhardt Seminar in Vienna, which is arguably the most important German-language acting school, was installed implementing his ideas.\n\nReinhardt took a greater interest in film than most of his contemporaries in the theater world. He made films as a director and from time to time also as a producer. His first staging was the film Sumurûn in 1910. After that, Reinhardt founded his own film company. He sold the film rights for the film adaptation of the play Das Mirakel ( The Miracle ) to Joseph Menchen , whose full-colour 1912 film of The Miracle gained world-wide success. Controversies around the staging of Das Mirakel , which was shown in the Vienna Rotunde in 1912, led to Reinhardt's retreat from the project. The author of the play, Reinhardt's friend and confidant Karl Gustav Vollmoeller , had French director Michel Carré finish the shooting.\n\nReinhardt made two films, Die Insel der Seligen ( Isle of the Blessed ) and Eine venezianische Nacht ( Venetian Nights ), under a four-picture contract for the German film producer Paul Davidson . Released in 1913 and 1914, respectively, both films received negative reviews from the press and public. The other two films called for in the contract were never made. \n\nBoth films demanded much of cameraman Karl Freund because of Reinhardt's special shooting needs, such as filming a lagoon in moonlight. Isle of the Blessed attracted attention due to its erotic nature. Its ancient mythical setting included sea gods, nymphs, and fauns, and the actors appeared naked. However, the film also fit in with the strict customs of the late German and Austrian empires. The actors had to live up to the demands of double roles. Wilhelm Diegelmann and Willy Prager played the bourgeois fathers as well as the sea gods, Ernst Matray [ de ] a bachelor and a faun, Leopoldine Konstantin the Circe . The shooting for Eine venezianische Nacht by Karl Gustav Vollmoeller took place in Venice. Maria Carmi played the bride, Alfred Abel the young stranger, and Ernst Matray Anselmus and Pipistrello. The shooting was disturbed by a fanatic who incited the attendant Venetians against the German-speaking staff.\n\nIn 1935, Reinhardt directed his first film in the US, A Midsummer Night's Dream . He founded the drama schools Hochschule für Schauspielkunst \"Ernst Busch\" in Berlin, Max Reinhardt Seminar , the Max Reinhardt Workshop ( Sunset Boulevard ), and the Max Reinhardt Junior Workshop.\n\nMax Reinhardt Seminar trained Kurt Kasznar . \n\nMax Reinhardt's Workshop of Stage, Screen, and Radio ( Sunset Boulevard ) ( Reinhardt School of the Theatre [ citation needed ] ) trained Ann Savage . Joan Barry , and Nanette Fabray ( Reinhardt School of the Theatre in Hollywood ). \n\nReinhardt won the school, Ben Bard Drama (a playhouse on Wilshire Boulevard), from Ben Bard in a poker game. Reinhardt opened the Reinhardt School of the Theatre in Hollywood, on Sunset Boulevard . Several notable stars of the day received classical theater training, among them actress Nanette Fabray . Many alumni of these schools made their careers in film. Edward G. Kuster , for two years, was the personal assistant to Reinhardt, taught classes and directed plays. In 1938, Walden Philip Boyle, later, a founding faculty of the Department of Theater Arts at UCLA, worked with the Max Reinhardt Theatre Academy in Hollywood . Students include Alan Ladd , Jack Carson , Robert Ryan , Gower Champion , Shirley Temple , Angie Dickinson , Frank Bonner , Anthony James , Greg Mullavey , Charlene Tilton , and Cliff Robertson In 1943, Reinhardt departed. It later was known as Geller Theatre Workshop , Hollywood School of Acting , and Theatre of Arts Hollywood Acting School . \n\nIn 2000, the school, Theatre of Arts , was associated with Campus Hollywood, which included, Musicians Institute , and Los Angeles College of Music . In 2009, James Warwick was appointed president.\n\nMax Reinhardt Junior Workshop trained Mala Powers . \n\nReinhardt died of a stroke in New York City in 1943 and is interred at Westchester Hills Cemetery in Hastings-on-Hudson , Westchester County , New York. He was 70 years old. His papers and literary estate are housed at Binghamton University (SUNY) , in the Max Reinhardt Archives and Library. His sons by first wife Else Heims (m. 1910–1935), Wolfgang and Gottfried Reinhardt , were well-regarded film producers. One of his grandsons (by adoption), Stephen Reinhardt , was a labor lawyer who served notably on the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit from his appointment by Jimmy Carter in 1980 until his death in 2018. Another grandson, Michael Reinhardt , is a successful fashion photographer. In 2015 his great-granddaughter Jelena Ulrike Reinhardt was appointed as researcher at the University of Perugia in German literature .\n\nOn 18 November 2015, the Friedrichstadt-Palast in Berlin inaugurated a memorial at Friedrichstraße 107 dedicated to the theatre's founders, Max Reinhardt, Hans Poelzig and Erik Charell . ",
  "The schottische is a partnered country dance that apparently originated in Bohemia . [ citation needed ] It was popular in Victorian-era ballrooms as a part of the Bohemian folk-dance craze and left its traces in folk music of countries such as Argentina ( chotis Spanish Wikipedia and chamamé ), Finland ( jenkka ), France, Italy, Norway (\" reinlender [ no ] \"), Portugal and Brazil ( xote , chotiça [ pt ] ), Spain ( chotis ), Sweden, Denmark ( schottis ), Mexico ( norteño music ), and the United States, among other nations. The schottische is considered by The Oxford Companion to Music to be a kind of slower polka , with continental-European origin.\n\nThe schottische basic step is made up of two sidesteps to the left and right, followed by a turn in four steps. In some countries, the sidesteps and turn are replaced by strathspey hopping steps .\n\nSchottisches danced in Europe (in the context of balfolk ), where they originated, are different from how they are danced in the United States. The European or Continental version (often pronounced \"skoteesh\"), is typically danced to faster music and is quite restrained in its movements. The American version (often pronounced \"shodish\") is often large and open, with a slower tempo than the European schottische. The first part is often expressed equally as promenades, individual or led twirls or similar moves, and the second part is most often expressed as a close pivot.\n\nIn Argentina, the schottische was introduced by Volga German immigrants (now usually called \"chotis\") and also evolved and mixed into chamamé , an Argentine folk music genre.\n\nIn Brazil, the xote has largely developed in the north-eastern area, especially the Sertão , where it has created variations such as baião and arrasta-pé , which are usually grouped in the forró denomination. All of these rhythms are typically danced in pairs, being xote the slower and simpler style of dancing, in which the couple alternate left-left-hop-right-right-hop steps.\n\nIn the Czech Republic , the dance was also known as šotyš . It is danced in its more traditional folk variants as an exhibition dance, and also in the balfolk scene.\n\nIn Finland the dance is generally known as a jenkka . In general, it is faster in tempo than the Norwegian reinlender and Swedish schottis .\n\nThe scottische was introduced in France in the 1850s. It rapidly disseminated from the salons to the countryside, becoming one of the most popular folk dances. It is one of the most common dance found in balfolk .\n\nThe schottish Espagnol or Spanish schottische, also known as the \"seven step\" gained popularity in France in the early 1900s.\n\nGermans refer to the dance as a Schottisch , which means Scottish. The Northern Rheinländer [ de ] and Bavarian/Austrian Boarisch are closely related.\n\nA dozen variations are known, for one or more couples, some free, some in fixed choreographies, and the original name became \"sciortis\" in Tuscany, \"sciotzè\" in southern Italy, \"sòtis\" in Romagna.\n\nIn the folk music of Ireland , a schottische is closely related to the highland tune type, though possessing a higher proportions of quarter notes . The so-called \"German schottische\", like the highland, was chiefly popular in Donegal and in Irish exile communities, notably Philadelphia , where Donegal emigrants settled. Also known as a \" barn dance \", the \"German\" is a two-hand dance played to tunes that end each eight-bar phrase with three lightly-accented quarter notes.\n\nKnown as chotís , it was introduced in México in 1850. In the beginning it was just a high-class ballroom dance. It became popular after a while and then a more \"rustic\" style was created for public parties and dance halls. It is popular in the northern states of Nuevo León, Tamaulipas, Durango and Zacatecas. \n\nIn Norway, the dance is called a reinlender . The name may suggest an origin in the area of the Rhine – meaning that it could be from Germany or Bohemia . The name was known as \" Rheinländer [ de ] \" in Bavaria .\n\nIn Poland, the dance was also known as \"polka tremblante\" or just tramblanka .\n\nIn Portugal, a form of schottische called xoutiça or xote has become heavily standardized for folklore displays. The pairs in groups of four, six or eight, form a circle and dance embraced all together. The circle starts to rotate until a moment when the pairs pass; that is, the pairs that are opposite each other switch places crossing each other in the center of the circle. They continue to pass successively two by two, all the pairs. After everybody made their pass, they continue to dance by rotating in circle. Further along in the dance, all the pairs will join in the center of the circle to beat the center of the circle with their feet, and continue to dance rotating the circle in the initial position, always for the right side. Bear in mind that all the moves are made always by the pair and never by one of its elements separately, because in the schottische you can never switch pair.\n\nThe Highland schottische is a combination of the common schottische and the old reel .\n\nIt has two main forms in 2 4 beat, one being more popular than the other. Both versions are similar in starting line-up to the Gay Gordons and has a polka feel to it. Typical tunes for a Highland schottische are \" Brochan Lom \" and \"Laddie With the Plaidie\".\n\nIn the more popular ceilidh version, the man stands on the left, the woman on the right. They join with left hands joined low in front and with the man's right arm over the woman's right shoulder and hands joined above it. The man points his left foot forward, toe to the floor and slightly to the left, whilst the woman does the same with her right foot. On the first two main beats, each partner raises onto their toes and performs a Highland step, bringing back the heel of extended foot against the calf of the other (inside) leg, whilst hopping on the other foot. They then trot forward 4 steps to the beat, pivot quickly so that the man is on the right and woman on the left, both facing the opposite direction of travel. Their right hands are now joined low forward and left hands above the woman's left shoulder. They perform the same Highland steps as before but now on the opposite foot, before trotting forward 4 steps again. They then face each other with the man on the inside of the circle of travel, the man's hands on the woman's waist and woman's hands on the man's shoulders (alternatively, the partners adopt the waltz position for their arms and hands). They now trot sideways 3 steps to the left (man left/right/left; woman right/left/right), then hop on the same foot as the third step, then trot sideways right (man right/left/right; woman left/right/left) and hop. For the last four bars, the pair spin round as they progress, hopping twice on each foot and finally once on the last bar (man left/left, right/right, left/left, right). They then re-form with hands joined front and back, man on left as before. The dance, when performed at ceilidhs, usually has a jolly, light-footed, spirited feel and is often accompanied by vocal yelps, woos and hooches from the male partners. The hopping spin toward the end of the routine is often done with great gusto. It often causes the pleated backs of the men's kilts to fly up and outward, sometimes with humorous results.\n\nA variation popular in Argyll in the 1920s and '30s focused on showing the man's dancing abilities and as such became known as a form of \"peacock dance\" (not to be confused with the Asian dances known by that term and featuring performers costumed as peacocks ). For the period of the Gay Gordons stance, the partners do not move forward at all, then pivot and move back. Instead, the woman stays in one position, performing the Highland toe-steps with the right foot for four bars, while hopping. The man meanwhile performs two Highland toe-steps with the left foot while hopping. He then moves across behind the woman on his toes for four steps, so that he is now on her right. He then performs two Highland toe-steps with the right foot then moves back behind the woman to her left side again, whilst she performs her toe steps with the left foot while remaining on the same spot. Back on the left, he then faces the woman and they perform the second (polka) half of the routine as per the popular version described above.\n\nA simplified ceilidh variation of the popular version does not required the Gay Gordons method of holding hands in the first half of the routine. Instead, the man holds the woman with his right arm across the small of the woman's back and she does the same to the man with her left arm. The toe-steps are performed as usual and they pivot and turn, whereupon the man puts his left arm across the small of the woman's back and she uses her right arm. The rest of the routine is as per the popular version.\n\nIn Madrid, the chotis , chotís or schotís is considered the most typical dance of the city since the 19th century and it is danced in all the traditional festivals. Some of the tunes, as \"Madrid, Madrid, Madrid\" by the Mexican composer Agustín Lara , became very well known in all Spain. The authors of the zarzuelas created a host of new chotis and strengthened their popularity. \n\nIn Sweden, the dance is known as a schottis . The name may suggest an origin in the area of Scotland. This is interesting because the Norwegian word used for the same dance is \"reinlender\", suggesting an origin from the Rhine region.\n\nThe schottische arrived in the United States from Europe and there are countless variations of the dance. After 1848, a number of old ballroom variants of schottische were danced in California. The \"Five-Step Schottische\" and a Highland schottische with modifications were included on lists of ballroom dances of the period. In Texas there have been schottische-like dances with names such as Drunk, Blue Bonnett, McGinty, and Douglas. Schottische variations include a straight leg kick, a kick-hop and a standing hop. Both include the traditional hop that is part of the schottische. \n\nIn the southern United States at the start of the 20th century the schottische was combined with ragtime ; the most popular \"ragtime schottische\" of the era was \"Any Rags\" by Thomas S. Allen in 1902. In New Orleans, Buddy Bolden 's band and other proto- jazz groups were known for playing hot schottisches. It is also danced as a Western promenade dance in country–western dance venues, often after the Cotton-Eyed Joe .\n\nAustralian composers of schottische music include Christian Helleman and Henry Marsh. ",
  "Mano ( Tagalog : pagmamano ) is an honoring gesture performed in Filipino culture as a sign of respect and as a way of requesting a blessing from elders. Similar to hand-kissing , the person giving the greeting asks for permission to initiate the gesture by saying \" Mano po \" or \"[ Pa- ]bless po \". They then bow towards the elder and touch their forehead to the back of the elder's hand. The person receiving the greeting usually offers their right hand and replies with a blessing, typically \"God bless you\". \n\nThe word mano is Spanish for \"hand\", while the word po is a Filipino honorific appended to sentences to convey respect (usually when addressing elders). Put together, mano po literally translates to \"[your] hand, please\". \n\nThe gesture is a form of greeting typically done for relatives that are older by at least one generation (grandparents, parents, aunts, and uncles; but not older siblings or cousins). It is also commonly done for godparents , friends of older relatives, older relatives of friends or partners, and priests and ministers (traditionally at the end of mass ). It can also be done for unrelated elderly acquaintances or strangers, especially when visiting their homes. \n\nThe gesture is also known as amin among Visayans , and siklod among Kapampangans . In Philippine English , it is also generically referred to as \" bless \". An identical tradition is followed in neighbouring Indonesia and Malaysia called salim and salam , respectively. This indicates that the custom dates back to pre-colonial times and is a shared tradition among cultures in Island Southeast Asia . \n\n\"Of the civilities, terms of courtesy, and good breeding among the Filipinos. Chapter XVI. ...As among them it is not courtesy to remain standing before a person whom they respect, they seat themselves upon the ground, or rather on their heel-bones. Seated in this way, with head uncovered and the potong thrown like a towel over the left shoulder, they talk with their superiors. The mode of salutation upon entering or meeting anyone is as follows: They draw the body together and make a low reverence, raising one or both hands to the face, and placing them upon the cheeks; they next sit down waiting for the question that may be put to them, for it is considered bad manners to speak before one is spoken to...\" — Fr. Pedro Chirino, Relacion de Islas Filipinas \n\n\"422. The natives of these islands employ innumerable other elegancies and courtesies, now in actions, now in words, now in names and titles, which they apply to themselves; these are various according to the difference of the provinces, and are too numerous to mention, for they are ceremonial, and they value their ceremonies highly. No one will pass in front of another, without asking permission, and in order to pass, he doubles the whole body with the most profound bow, at the same time lifting one foot in the air, and doubling the knee and lifting both hands to the face. If one has to talk to any person of higher rank, he shows all reverence and squats down [pone en cuclillas], with raised face, and waits thus, until he is asked his reason for coming; for to speak without being questioned would be a point of bad breeding.\" — Fr. Juan de San Antonio, Cronicas (1738) \n\nThe custom of mano , although the name itself originates from Spanish, actually dates from pre-colonial times. As a result later on to modern times, Filipinos adopted this tradition as a sign of respect to one’s elders through the “mano”, lit. 'hand' in Spanish. A similar custom is also followed by neighboring countries like Indonesia, Malaysia, and Brunei. In these countries, however, the custom is called salim originating from Arabic. Salim is also done in the family to respect elder family members and relatives. Salim is also a normal gesture done in traditional Islamic society to respect the ulama (religious elite/scholars). \n\nIn today's Philippine setting, the mano is still used by Filipinos as a sign of respect to their elders. It is usually done when the elder is seen for the first time in the day or upon entering a house or gathering. There is no age limit for the usage of the mano, but it is usually practiced on those older by at least one generation. So it applies to parents, aunts, uncles, and grandparents; but not older cousins or siblings.\n\nBy offering your hand to mano , you are allowing yourself to be subservient to the elder to accept their blessing and wisdom. It is considered impolite if one does not exercise the custom of pagmamano when entering the home of an elder or after seeing them at a gathering. \n\nThe respect for elders stems from the high value of family in Filipino culture. Filipinos are loyal to their family, such that the elderly live in the homes of their children or/and grandchildren to be taken care of, and the nursing home business is almost nonexistent in the Philippines. By having the elderly live at home, you are respecting their value in the family. \n\nThough the mano po gesture is usually practiced on one's parents, grandparents, uncles, and aunts, it is not restricted to one’s relatives. Godparents are often greeted this way as well. During foreign Latin Occupation times, Catholic priests were also greeted like this, alongside the European practice of hand-kissing , and this still continues today often after a Catholic Mass , though the latter has fallen out of use.\n\nThe reason why Filipinos mano elders although they are not necessarily a relative is due to the value of family. Filipinos call older non-relatives \"grandfather/mother, aunt, uncle, etc.\" even when they are not actually related in this way. By addressing elders in this way, you are acknowledging their age and the respect you need to show them. It is considered to be disrespectful to call an elder just by their first name, typical to the rest of Asian societies. Filipinos treat friends and acquaintances like family. \n\nThe mano po gesture is usually followed by a response of \"God bless you\" or \"May the Lord have mercy on you\" by the elder; the sign of the cross may be made over the recipient. The latter response of \"May the Lord have mercy on you\" is used when the pagmamano is performed with both hands to ask for an elder's pardon and forgiveness. With both hands, the younger person takes the elder's hands and lifts them to the forehead to formally ask forgiveness for an offence. This may be done while kneeling and weeping and is the highest form of the pagmamano . \n\nThe beso is a common greeting in the Philippines similar to the mano . The beso-beso is a cheek-to-cheek kiss . The beso is more commonly used amongst the upper classes as a greeting to relatives and close friends, but is not reserved for an older person unlike the mano . \n\nSimilar to the mano po gesture, po and opo are also distinctly Filipino ways of showing respect to one's elders. The po is usually affixed to the end of sentences or phrases when one is addressing someone older than him or her. For example, paumanhin in Filipino means sorry. To an elder, one would say paumanhin po , The word po alone has origins as a respectful honorific but in contemporary times, it does not carry its past implications anymore besides its contemporary meaning to add formality as a sign of respect. This is why it is always affixed to mano (as mano po ) when one is requesting the blessing of an elder. ",
  "Closed-circuit television ( CCTV ), also known as video surveillance , is the use of closed-circuit television cameras to transmit a signal to a specific place on a limited set of monitors. It differs from broadcast television in that the signal is not openly transmitted, though it may employ point-to-point , point-to-multipoint (P2MP), or mesh wired or wireless links . Even though almost all video cameras fit this definition, the term is most often applied to those used for surveillance in areas that require additional security or ongoing monitoring ( videotelephony is seldom called \"CCTV\" ).\n\nThe deployment of this technology has facilitated significant growth in state surveillance, a substantial rise in the methods of advanced social monitoring and control, and a host of crime prevention measures throughout the world. Though surveillance of the public using CCTV is common in many areas around the world, video surveillance has generated significant debate about balancing its use with individuals' right to privacy even when in public. \n\nIn industrial plants , CCTV equipment may be used to observe parts of a process from a central control room , especially if the environments observed are dangerous or inaccessible to humans. CCTV systems may operate continuously or only as required to monitor a particular event. A more advanced form of CCTV, using digital video recorders (DVRs), provides recording for possibly many years, with a variety of quality and performance options and extra features (such as motion detection and email alerts). More recently, decentralized IP cameras , perhaps equipped with megapixel sensors, support recording directly to network-attached storage devices or internal flash for stand-alone operation.\n\nAn early mechanical CCTV system was developed in June 1927 by Russian physicist Leon Theremin . Originally requested by CTO (the Soviet Council of Labor and Defense ), the system consisted of a manually-operated scanning-transmitting camera and wireless shortwave transmitter and receiver, with a resolution of a hundred lines. Having been commandeered by Kliment Voroshilov , Theremin's CCTV system was demonstrated to Joseph Stalin , Semyon Budyonny , and Sergo Ordzhonikidze , and subsequently installed in the courtyard of the Moscow Kremlin to monitor approaching visitors. \n\nAnother early CCTV system was installed by Siemens AG at Test Stand VII in Peenemünde , Nazi Germany, in 1942, for observing the launch of V-2 rockets . \n\nIn the United States, the first commercial closed-circuit television system became available in 1949 from Remington Rand and designed by CBS Laboratories , called \"Vericon\". Vericon was advertised as not requiring a government permit due to the system using cabled connections between camera and monitor rather than over-the-air transmission. \n\nThe earliest video surveillance systems involved constant monitoring because there was no way to record and store information. The development of reel-to-reel media enabled the recording of surveillance footage. These systems required magnetic tapes to be changed manually, with the operator having to manually thread the tape from the tape reel through the recorder onto a take-up reel. Due to these shortcomings, video surveillance was not widespread. \n\nLater, videocassette recorder technology became available in the 1970s, making it easier to record and erase information, and the use of video surveillance became more common. During the 1990s, digital multiplexing was developed, allowing several cameras to record at once, as well as time lapse and motion-only recording. This saved time and money which then led to an increase in the use of CCTV. Recently, CCTV technology has been shifting towards Internet-based products and systems, and other technological developments. \n\nEarly CCTV systems were installed in central London by the Metropolitan Police between 1960 and 1965. By 1963, CCTV was being used in Munich to monitor traffic. Closed-circuit television was used as a form of pay-per-view theatre television for sports such as professional boxing and professional wrestling , and from 1964 through 1970, the Indianapolis 500 automobile race. Boxing telecasts were broadcast live to a select number of venues, mostly theaters, with arenas, stadiums, schools, and convention centres also being less often used venues, where viewers paid for tickets to watch the fight live. The first fight with a closed-circuit telecast was Joe Louis vs. Joe Walcott in 1948. \n\nClosed-circuit telecasts peaked in popularity with Muhammad Ali in the 1960s and 1970s, with \" The Rumble in the Jungle \" fight drawing 50 million CCTV viewers worldwide in 1974, and the \" Thrilla in Manila \" drawing 100 million CCTV viewers worldwide in 1975. In 1985, the WrestleMania I professional wrestling show was seen by over one million viewers with this scheme. As late as 1996, the Julio César Chávez vs. Oscar De La Hoya boxing fight had 750,000 viewers. Although closed-circuit television was gradually replaced by pay-per-view home cable television in the 1980s and 1990s, it is still in use today for most awards shows and other events that are transmitted live to most venues but do not air as such on network television, and later re-edited for broadcast. \n\nIn September 1968, Olean, New York , was the first city in the United States to install CCTV video cameras along its main business street in an effort to fight crime. Marie Van Brittan Brown received a patent for the design of a CCTV-based home security system in 1969. ( U.S. patent 3,482,037 ). Another early appearance was in 1973 in Times Square in New York City . The NYPD installed it to deter crime in the area; however, crime rates did not appear to drop much due to the cameras. Nevertheless, during the 1980s, video surveillance began to spread across the country specifically targeting public areas. It was seen as a cheaper way to deter crime compared to increasing the size of the police departments. Some businesses as well, especially those that were prone to theft, began to use video surveillance. From the mid-1990s on, police departments across the country installed an increasing number of cameras in various public spaces including housing projects, schools, and public parks. CCTV later became common in banks and stores to discourage theft by recording evidence of criminal activity. In 1997, 3,100 CCTV systems were installed in public housing and residential areas in New York City. \n\nExperiments in the UK during the 1970s and 1980s, including outdoor CCTV in Bournemouth in 1985, led to several larger trial programs later that decade. The first use by local government was in King's Lynn , Norfolk, in 1987. \n\nA 2008 report by UK Police Chiefs concluded that only 3% of crimes were solved by CCTV. In London, a Metropolitan Police report showed that in 2008 only one crime was solved per 1000 cameras. In some cases CCTV cameras have become a target of attacks themselves. A 2009 systematic review by researchers from Northeastern University and the University of Cambridge used meta-analytic techniques to pool the average effect of CCTV on crime across 41 different studies. The studies included in the meta-analysis used quasi-experimental evaluation designs that involved before-and-after measures of crime in experimental and control areas. However, researchers have argued that the British car park studies included in the meta-analysis cannot accurately control for the fact that CCTV was introduced simultaneously with a range of other security-related measures. Second, some have noted that, in many of the studies, there may be issues with selection bias since the introduction of CCTV was potentially endogenous to previous crime trends. In particular, the estimated effects may be biased if CCTV is introduced in response to crime trends. \n\nIn 2012, cities such as Manchester in the UK are using DVR -based technology to improve accessibility for crime prevention. In 2013, City of Philadelphia Auditor found that the $15 million system was operational only 32% of the time. There is anecdotal evidence that CCTV aids in detection and conviction of offenders; for example, UK police forces routinely seek CCTV recordings after crimes. Cameras have also been installed on public transport in the hope of deterring crime. \n\nA 2017 review published in the Journal of Scandinavian Studies in Criminology and Crime Prevention compiles seven studies that use such research designs. The studies found that CCTV reduced crime by 24–28% in public streets and urban subway stations. It also found that CCTV could decrease unruly behaviour in football stadiums and theft in supermarkets/mass merchant stores. However, there was no evidence of CCTV having desirable effects in parking facilities or suburban subway stations. Furthermore, the review indicates that CCTV is more effective in preventing property crimes than in violent crimes. However, a 2019, 40-year-long systematic review study reported that the most consistent effects of crime reduction of CCTV were in car parks. \n\nA more open question is whether most CCTV is cost-effective. While low-quality domestic kits are cheap, the professional installation and maintenance of high definition CCTV is expensive. Gill and Spriggs did a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) of CCTV in crime prevention that showed little monetary saving with the installation of CCTV as most of the crimes prevented resulted in little monetary loss. Critics however noted that benefits of non-monetary value cannot be captured in a traditional cost effectiveness analysis and were omitted from their study. \n\nIn October 2009, an \"Internet Eyes\" website was announced which would pay members of the public to view CCTV camera images from their homes and report any crimes they witnessed. The site aimed to add \"more eyes\" to cameras which might be insufficiently monitored. Civil liberties campaigners criticized the idea as \"a distasteful and a worrying development\". Russia has also implemented a video surveillance system called 'Safe City', which has the capability to recognize facial features and moving objects, sending the data automatically to government authorities. However, the widespread tracking of individuals through video surveillance has raised significant privacy issues. \n\nMaterial collected by surveillance cameras has been used as a tool in post-event forensics to identify tactics and perpetrators of terrorist attacks . Furthermore, there are various projects—such as INDECT —that aim to detect suspicious behaviours of individuals and crowds. It has been argued that terrorists will not be deterred by cameras, that terror attacks are not really the subject of the current use of video surveillance and that terrorists might even see it as an extra channel for propaganda and publication of their acts. In Germany, calls for extended video surveillance by the country's main political parties, SPD , CDU , and CSU have been dismissed as \"little more than a placebo for a subjective feeling of security\" by a member of the Left party. \n\nIn Singapore, since 2012, thousands of CCTV cameras have helped deter loan sharks , nab litterbugs, and stop illegal parking, according to government figures. In 2013, Oaxaca , Mexico, hired deaf police officers to lip read conversations to uncover criminal conspiracies. \n\nIn recent years, the use of body-worn video cameras has been introduced for a number of uses. For example, as a new form of surveillance in law enforcement, there are surveillance cameras that are worn by the police officer and are usually located on a police officer's chest or head. According to the Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), in the United States, in 2016, about 47% of the 15,328 general-purpose law enforcement agencies had acquired body-worn cameras. \n\nMany cities and motorway networks have extensive traffic-monitoring systems. Many of these cameras however, are owned by private companies and transmit data to drivers' GPS systems.\n\nHighways England has a publicly owned CCTV network of over 3000 pan–tilt–zoom cameras covering the British motorway and trunk road network. These cameras are primarily used to monitor traffic conditions and are not used as speed cameras . With the addition of fixed cameras for the active traffic management system, the number of cameras on the Highways England's CCTV network is likely to increase significantly over the next few years. The London congestion charge is enforced by cameras positioned at the boundaries of and inside the congestion charge zone, which automatically read the number plates of vehicles that enter the zone. If the driver does not pay the charge then a fine will be imposed. Similar systems are being developed as a means of locating cars reported stolen. Other surveillance cameras serve as traffic enforcement cameras . \n\nIn Mecca , Saudi Arabia, CCTV cameras are used for monitoring (and thus managing ) the flow of crowds. In the Philippines, barangay San Antonio used CCTV cameras and artificial intelligence software to detect the formation of crowds during an outbreak of a disease . Security personnel were sent whenever a crowd formed at a particular location in the city. \n\nIn the United States, Britain, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, CCTV is widely used in schools to prevent bullying , vandalism , monitoring visitors, and maintaining a record of evidence of a crime. There are some restrictions: cameras are not typically installed in areas where there is a \"reasonable expectation of privacy \", such as bathrooms, gym locker areas, and private offices. Cameras are generally acceptable in parking lots, cafeterias, and supply rooms. Though some teachers object to the installation of cameras. A study of high school students in Israeli schools shows that students' views on CCTV used in school are based on how they think of their teachers, school, and authorities. It also stated that most students do not want CCTV installed inside a classroom. \n\nMany homeowners choose to install CCTV systems either inside or outside their own homes, sometimes both. Modern CCTV systems can be monitored through mobile phone apps with internet coverage. Some systems also provide motion detection, so when movement is detected, an alert can be sent to a phone. \n\nOn a driver-only operated train, CCTV cameras may allow the driver to confirm that people are clear of doors before closing them and starting the train. A trial by RET in 2011 with facial recognition cameras mounted on trams made sure that people who were banned from them did not sneak on anyway. CCTV has also been frequently operated in many department stores and shopping malls to mitigate concerns of potential theft. In some countries, malls must obtain approval from the Ministry of Interior (MOI) or Information Commissioner's Office (ICO) before installing CCTVs. Some organizations also use CCTV to monitor the actions of workers in a workplace. \n\nMany sporting events in the United States use CCTV inside the venue, either to display on the stadium or arena's scoreboard or in the concourse or restroom areas to allow people to view action outside the seating bowl. The cameras send the feed to a central control centre where a producer selects feeds to send to the television monitors that people can view. In a trial with CCTV cameras, football club fans no longer needed to identify themselves manually, but could pass freely after being authorized by the facial recognition system. \n\nCriminals may use surveillance cameras to monitor the public. For example, a hidden camera at an ATM can capture people's PINs as they are entered without their knowledge. The devices are small enough not to be noticed, and are placed where they can monitor the keypad of the machine as people enter their PINs. Images may be transmitted wirelessly to the criminal. Even lawful surveillance cameras sometimes have their data received by people who have no legal right to receive it. \n\nAbout 65% of CCTV cameras in the world are installed in Asia. In Asia, different human activities attracted the use of surveillance camera systems and services, including but not limited to business and related industries, transportation, sports, and care for the environment. \n\nIn 2018, China was reported to have over 170 million CCTV cameras. In 2023, China was estimated to have a huge surveillance network of around 540–626 million surveillance cameras, though numbers differ significantly between sources. Beijing , China's capital city, has the most cameras for a city overall, with a total of 1.15 million installed. The cameras are used to record details such as gender, age, and ethnicity. Cameras have been used in a southern Chinese city to issue tickets to people for infractions . In India, the cities of Hyderabad and Delhi , the capital, have around 900,000 and 450,000 cameras, respectively. The city of Chennai has the highest density per area of CCTV cameras worldwide, with 657 cameras per square kilometer in 2020 (from 280,000 CCTVs). China and India have some of the highest-density and the most amount of CCTVs in cities. \n\nSouth Korea's military has removed over 1,300 surveillance Chinese cameras from its bases for security reasons. In Hong Kong, the police have stated that they are planning to install up to 7,000 surveillance cameras across Hong Kong in roughly three years time, up from the estimated 600 installed cameras in 2024; this amounts to roughly 2,000 planned cameras every year starting from 2025. Earlier, in June 2024, the cameras have also been vaguely planned to be integrated with facial recognition artificial intelligence. The plan has been criticized for the potential for the country to become similar to the \"intense surveillance of mainland China\". In Japan, an estimation by Nikkei Business estimated that the total number of security cameras in Japan is approximately 5 million in 2018. In Singapore, it was estimated that the total number of CCTVs was around 90,000 in 2021. \n\nIn 2009, there were an estimated 15,000 CCTV systems in Chicago , many linked to an integrated camera network. New York City's Domain Awareness System has 6,000 video surveillance cameras linked together, there are over 4,000 cameras on the subway system (although nearly half of them do not work), and two-thirds of large apartment and commercial buildings use video surveillance cameras. In Washington, D.C. , there are more than 30,000 surveillance cameras in schools, and the Metro has nearly 6,000 cameras in use across the system. \n\nThere were an estimated 30 million surveillance cameras in the United States in 2011. Video surveillance has been common in the United States since the 1990s; for example, one manufacturer reported net earnings of $120 million in 1995. With lower cost and easier installation, sales of home security cameras increased in the early 21st century. Following the September 11 attacks , the use of video surveillance in public places became more common to deter future terrorist attacks. Under the Homeland Security Grant Program , government grants are available for cities to install surveillance camera networks. In 2018, there are approximately 70 million surveillance cameras in the United States. \n\nIn Canada, Project SCRAM is a policing effort by the Canadian policing service Halton Regional Police Service to register and help consumers understand privacy and safety issues related to the installations of home security systems. The project service has not been extended to commercial businesses. \n\nIn Latin America, the CCTV market is growing rapidly with the increase of property crime. In Brazil, CCTV usage is only permitted in public areas, though individuals must be informed about the presence of the camera according to the Brazilian LGPD (which broadly aligns with the EU's GDPR), the Brazilian Civil Code , and the Brazilian Association of Technical Standards . However, starting in 2023, in Brazil, the Smart Sampa project, a project that plans to deploy 20,000 facial recognition cameras by 2024, has been criticized for its potential to be \"biased against Black individuals \" and overall risks of data privacy. \n\nIn 2017, in Russia, the Moscow network included 160,000 CCTV cameras and 95 percent of residential buildings; over 3,500 Russian cameras were connected to the General Centre for Data Storage and Processing. Video recordings are used to solve 70 percent of offenses and crimes. In 2024, there are over 1 million video surveillance cameras in Russia. About 230,000 are in use in Moscow alone. According to data from the Russian Minister for Digital Development, Maksut Shadayev , one in three of all CCTVs in Russia were connected to a facial recognition system . A leaked document revealed that the president of Russia, Vladimir Putin , called on the Russian security services to fund \"a massive AI-based surveillance apparatus\". The spending of over US$ 115 million was planned for the system in 2024–2026. \n\nIn the United Kingdom, the vast majority of CCTV cameras are operated not by government bodies, but by private individuals or companies, especially to monitor the interiors of shops and businesses. According to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 requests, the total number of local government-operated CCTV cameras was around 52,000 over the entirety of the UK. \n\nAn article published in CCTV Image magazine estimated the number of private and local government-operated cameras in the United Kingdom was 1.85 million in 2011. The estimate was based on extrapolating from a comprehensive survey of public and private cameras within the Cheshire Constabulary jurisdiction. This works out as an average of one camera for every 32 people in the UK, although the density of cameras varies greatly from place to place. The Cheshire report also claims that the average person on a typical day would be seen by 70 CCTV cameras. \n\nThe Cheshire figure is regarded as more dependable than a previous study by Michael McCahill and Clive Norris of UrbanEye published in 2002. Based on a small sample in Putney High Street, McCahill and Norris extrapolated the number of surveillance cameras in Greater London to be around 500,000 and the total number of cameras in the UK to be around 4.2 million. According to their estimate, the UK has one camera for every 14 people. Although it has been acknowledged for several years that the methodology behind this figure is flawed, it has been widely quoted. Furthermore, the figure of 500,000 for Greater London is often confused with the figure for the police and local government-operated cameras in the City of London , which was about 650 in 2011. \n\nThe CCTV User Group estimated that there were around 1.5 million private and local government CCTV cameras in city centres, stations, airports, and major retail areas in the UK. Research conducted by the Scottish Centre for Crime and Justice Research and based on a survey of all Scottish local authorities identified that there are over 2,200 public space CCTV cameras in Scotland. The UK has often been cited as a country that has one of the most CCTV cameras in Europe. \n\nIn South Africa, due to the high crime rate , CCTV surveillance is widely prevalent. The first IP camera was released in 1996 by Axis Communications , but IP cameras did not arrive in South Africa until 2008. To regulate the number of suppliers in 2001, the Private Security Industry Regulation Act was passed requiring all security companies to be registered with the Private Security Industry Regulatory Authority (PSIRA). In Egypt, the capital city of Cairo has approximately 47,000 cameras, while the New Administrative Capital has more than 6,000 surveillance cameras in 2023. In South Sudan, the Ministry of Interior has reinstated the operation of CCTV surveillance cameras in Juba after the cameras have been inactive for over four years; South Sudan also launched a drone security system in 2024 in Juba. \n\nProponents of CCTV cameras argue that cameras are effective at deterring and solving crime, and that appropriate regulation and legal restrictions on surveillance of public spaces can provide sufficient protections so that an individual's right to privacy can reasonably be weighed against the benefits of surveillance. However, anti-surveillance activists have held that there is a right to privacy in public areas, that the development of CCTV in public areas, linked to databases of people's pictures and identity, presents a breach of civil liberties and the loss of anonymity in public places . \n\nFurthermore, some scholars have argued that situations wherein a person's rights can be justifiably compromised are so rare as to not sufficiently warrant the frequent compromising of public privacy rights that occurs in regions with widespread CCTV surveillance. For example, in her book Setting the Watch: Privacy and the Ethics of CCTV Surveillance , Beatrice von Silva-Tarouca Larsen argues that CCTV surveillance is ethically permissible only in \"certain restrictively defined situations\", such as when a specific location has a \"comprehensively documented and significant criminal threat\". \n\nIn the United States , the Constitution does not explicitly include the right to privacy although the Supreme Court has said several of the amendments to the Constitution implicitly grant this right. Access to video surveillance recordings may require a judge's writ , which is readily available. However, there is little legislation and regulation specific to video surveillance. In Canada , the use of video surveillance has grown very rapidly. In Ontario , both the municipal and provincial versions of the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act outline guidelines that control how images and information can be gathered by this method and or released. \n\nAll countries in the European Union are signatories to the European Convention on Human Rights , which protects individual rights, including the right to privacy. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) required that the footage should only be retained for as long as necessary for the purpose for which it was collected. In Sweden , the use of CCTV in public spaces is regulated both nationally and via GDPR. In an opinion poll commissioned by Lund University in August 2017, the general public of Sweden was asked to choose one measure that would ensure their need for privacy when subject to CCTV operation in public spaces: 43% favored regulation in the form of clear routines for managing, storing, and distributing image material generated from surveillance cameras, 39% favored regulation in the form of clear signage informing that camera surveillance in public spaces is present, 10% favored regulation in the form of having restrictive policies for issuing permits for surveillance cameras in public spaces, 6% were unsure, and 2% favored regulation in the form of having permits restricting the use of surveillance cameras during certain times. \n\nIn an updated opinion poll commissioned by Lund University in December 2019, the general public of Sweden was asked to share their attitudes toward the use of surveillance cameras (CCTV) in public spaces. A significant majority, 88%, expressed a positive view—45% were very positive and 43% quite positive—while only 11% held negative views, and 1% were unsure. Participants were also asked whether they believed surveillance cameras in various environments violated their personal privacy. A majority rejected that such surveillance violated their privacy at national border-crossings (82%), in city centers (77%), parks and green spaces (74%), large public events (80%), and healthcare units (68%). Somewhat less rejection was observed for surveillance in residential areas, where 67% rejected the notion that it violated their privacy. When asked about the perceived use of automatic facial recognition in surveillance cameras in Sweden, 9% believed it was used quite a lot, 55% believed it was not used much, 21% believed it was not used at all, and 15% were unsure. Regarding privacy risks, 55% of respondents believed the greatest risk came from commercial documentation of individuals (e.g., data collection tracking online consumer behavior), followed by 20% who pointed to other members of the public documenting them (e.g., photography or audio recording), and 11% who saw the greatest risk in public sector data collection (e.g., by law enforcement or healthcare providers). 15% were unsure. When asked to whom they would turn to report a privacy breach related to public camera surveillance, 35% said the Swedish National Police, 6% mentioned the Swedish Data Protection Authority, and 39% did not know where to turn. \n\nIn the United Kingdom , the Data Protection Act 1998 imposes legal restrictions on the uses of CCTV recordings and mandates the registration of CCTV systems with the Data Protection Agency. In 2004, the successor to the Data Protection Agency, the Information Commissioner's Office , clarified that this required registration of all CCTV systems with the Commissioner and prompt deletion of archived recordings. However, subsequent case law ( Durant vs. FSA ) limited the scope of the protection provided by this law, and not all CCTV systems are currently regulated. \n\nA 2007 report by the UK Information Commissioner's Office highlighted the need for the public to be made more aware of the growing use of surveillance and the potential impact on civil liberties. In the same year, a campaign group claimed that the majority of CCTV cameras in the UK are operated illegally or are in breach of privacy guidelines. In response, the Information Commissioner's Office rebutted the claim and added that any reported abuses of the Data Protection Act are swiftly investigated. Even if there are some concerns arising from the use of CCTV such as involving privacy, more commercial establishments are still installing CCTV systems in the UK. In 2012, the UK government enacted the Protection of Freedoms Act which includes several provisions related to controlling the storage and use of information about individuals. Under this Act, the Home Office published a code of practice in 2013 for the use of surveillance cameras by government and local authorities. The code wrote that \"surveillance by consent should be regarded as analogous to policing by consent .\" \n\nIn the Philippines , the main laws governing CCTV usage are Data Privacy Act of 2012 and the Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012 . The Data Privacy Act of 2012 (Republic Act No. 10173) is the primary law that governs data privacy in the Philippines. The Act mandates that the privacy of individuals must be respected and protected. The law applies to CCTV cameras as they collect and process personal data. The Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012 (Republic Act No. 10175) includes provisions that apply to CCTV usage. Under the Act, the unauthorized access to, interception of, or interference with data is a criminal offense. This means that unauthorized access to CCTV footage could potentially be considered a cybercrime. \n\nComputer-controlled cameras can identify, track , and categorize objects in their field of view. Video content analysis , also referred to as video analytics, is the capability of automatically analyzing video to detect and determine temporal events not based on a single image but rather on object classification . Advanced VCA applications can measure object speed. Some video analytics applications can be used to apply rules to designated areas. These rules can relate to access control. For example, they can describe which objects can enter into a specific area. There are different approaches to implementing VCA technology. Data may be processed on the camera itself ( edge processing ) or by a centralized server. Artificial intelligence -powered CCTV cameras have also been further tested to detect congestion, be used as a facial recognition system, and predict signs of criminal activities. \n\nThere is a cost in the retention of the images produced by CCTV systems. The amount and quality of data stored on storage media is subject to compression ratios, images stored per second, and image size, and is affected by the retention period of the videos or images. DVRs store images in a variety of proprietary file formats . CCTV security cameras can either store the images on a local hard disk drive, an SD card, or in the cloud. Recordings may be retained for a preset amount of time and then automatically archived, overwritten, or deleted, the period being determined by the organisation that generated them.\n\nA growing branch in CCTV is internet protocol cameras (IP cameras). It is estimated that 2014 was the first year that IP cameras outsold analog cameras. IP cameras use the Internet Protocol (IP) used by most local area networks (LANs) to transmit video across data networks in digital form. IP can optionally be transmitted across the public internet, allowing users to view their cameras remotely on a computer or phone via an internet connection. IP cameras are considered part of the Internet of things ( IoT ) and have many of the same benefits and security risks as other IP-enabled devices. Smart doorbells are one example of a type of CCTV that uses IP to allow it to send alerts.\n\nMain types of IP cameras include fixed cameras, pan–tilt–zoom (PTZ) cameras, and multi-sensor cameras. Fixed cameras' resolution typically does not exceed 20 megapixels . The main feature of a PTZ is its remote directional and optical zoom capability. With multi-sensor cameras, wider areas can be monitored. Industrial video surveillance systems use network video recorders to support IP cameras. These devices are responsible for the recording, storage, video stream processing, and alarm management. Since 2008, IP video surveillance manufacturers can use a standardized network interface ( ONVIF ) to support compatibility between systems. For professional or public infrastructure security applications, IP video is restricted to within a private network or VPN . \n\nThe city of Chicago operates a networked video surveillance system which combines CCTV video feeds of government agencies with those of the private sector, installed in city buses, businesses, public schools, subway stations, housing projects, etc. Even homeowners are able to contribute footage. It is estimated to incorporate the video feeds of a total of 15,000 cameras. The system is used by Chicago's Office of Emergency Management in case of an emergency call: it detects the caller's location and instantly displays the real-time video feed of the nearest security camera to the operator, not requiring any user intervention. While the system is far too vast to allow complete real-time monitoring, it stores the video data for use as evidence in criminal cases. \n\nMany consumers are turning to wireless security cameras for home surveillance. Wireless cameras do not require a video cable for video/audio transmission, simply a cable for power. Wireless cameras are also easy and inexpensive to install. Previous generations of wireless security cameras relied on analogue technology; modern wireless cameras use digital technology with usually more secure and interference-free signals. Wireless mesh networks have been used for connection with the other radios in the same group. There are also cameras using solar power. Wireless IP cameras can become a client on the WLAN , and they can be configured with encryption and authentication protocols with a connection to an access point . \n\nIn Wiltshire , United Kingdom, in 2003, a pilot scheme for what is now known as \"Talking CCTV\" was put into action, allowing operators of CCTV cameras to communicate through the camera via a speaker when it is needed. In 2005, Ray Mallon , the mayor and former senior police officer of Middlesbrough , implemented \"Talking CCTV\" in his area. Other towns have had such cameras installed. In 2007, several of the devices were installed in Bridlington town centre, East Riding of Yorkshire . \n\nIn December 2016, a form of anti-CCTV and facial recognition sunglasses called \"reflectacles\" were invented by a craftsman based in Chicago named Scott Urban. They reflect infrared and, optionally, visible light which makes the user's face a white blur to cameras. The project passed its funding goal of $28,000, and \"reflectacles\" became commercially available in June 2017. ",
  "Flashing is thin pieces of impervious material installed to prevent the passage of water into a structure from a joint or as part of a weather resistant barrier system. In modern buildings, flashing is intended to decrease water penetration at objects such as chimneys , vent pipes, walls, windows and door openings to make buildings more durable and to reduce indoor mold problems. Metal flashing materials include lead , aluminium , copper , stainless steel , zinc alloy , and other materials.\n\nThe origin of the term flash and flashing are uncertain, but may come from the Middle English verb flasshen , 'to sprinkle, splash', related to flask . \n\nCounter-flashing (or cover flashing , cap flashing ) is a term used when there are two parallel pieces of flashing employed together such as on a chimney, where the counter-flashing is built into the chimney and overlaps a replaceable piece of base flashing . Strips of lead used for flashing an edge were sometimes called an apron , and the term is still used for the piece of flashing below a chimney. The up-hill side of a chimney may have a small gable-like assembly called a cricket with cricket flashing or on narrow chimneys with no cricket a back flashing or back pan flashing . Flashing may be let into a groove in a wall or chimney called a reglet .\n\nBefore the availability of sheet products for flashing, builders used creative methods to minimize water penetration. These methods included angling roof shingles away from the joint, placing chimneys at the ridge, building steps into the sides of chimneys to throw off water, and covering the seams between roofing materials with mortar flaunching . The introduction of manufactured flashing decreased water penetration at obstacles such as chimneys, vent pipes, walls which abut roofs, window and door openings, etc., thus making buildings more durable and reducing indoor mold problems. It is also essential to prevent leaks around skylights or roof windows. [ citation needed ] Moreover, flashing is important to ensure the integrity of a roof prior to a solar panel installation. [ citation needed ]\n\nBuilders' books, such as Loudons An Encyclopædia of Cottage, Farm, and Villa Architecture and Furniture... gave instructions on installing lead flashing by 1832 and in 1875 Notes on Building Construction provided detailed instruction and is well illustrated with methods still used today. \n\nFlashing may be exposed or concealed. Exposed flashing is usually of a sheet metal, while concealed flashing may be metal or a flexible, adhesive-backed material, particularly around wall penetrations such as window and door openings.\n\nIn earlier days, birch bark was occasionally used as a flashing material. Most flashing materials today are metal, plastic, rubber, or impregnated paper. \n\nMetal flashing materials include lead, aluminium , copper , stainless steel , zinc alloy, other architectural metals or a metal with a coating such as galvanized steel, lead-coated copper, anodized aluminium, terne -coated copper, galvalume (aluminium-zinc alloy coated sheet steel), and metals similar to stone-coated metal roofing . Metal flashing should be provided with expansion joints on long runs to prevent deformation of the metal sheets due to expansion and contraction, and should not stain or be stained by adjacent materials or react chemically with them.\n\nAn important type of potential chemical reaction between metal flashing materials is galvanic corrosion . Copper and lead cannot be used in contact with or even above aluminium, zinc, or coated steel without an increased risk of premature corrosion. Also, aluminium and zinc flashing cannot be used in contact with pressure treated wood due to rapid corrosion. Aluminium is also damaged by wet mortar and wet plaster. Salt spray in coastal areas may accelerate corrosion; so stainless steel, copper, or coated aluminium are recommended flashing materials near salt water.\n\nTypes of flexible flashing products are rubberized asphalt , butyl rubber , polyvinylidene fluoride (sometimes known as kylar or hylar), and acrylic. The different types have different application temperature ranges, material adhesion compatibility, chemical compatibility, levels of volatile organic compounds , and resistance to ultraviolet light exposure. Adhesive backed materials can aid installation, but such adhesives are not intended for long-term water-resistance. [ citation needed ]\n\nCopper is an excellent material for flashing because of its malleability, strength, solder-ability, workability, high resistance to the caustic effects of mortars and hostile environments, and long service life (see: copper flashing ) . This enables a roof to be built without weak points. Since flashing is expensive to replace if it fails, copper's long life is a major cost advantage. \n\nCold rolled (to 1/8-hard temper) copper is recommended for most flashing applications. This material offers more resistance than soft copper to the stresses of expansion and contraction. Soft copper can be specified where extreme forming is required, such as in complicated roof shapes. Thermal movement in flashings is prevented or is permitted only at predetermined locations. \n\n\"Soft zinc\" is a newer, proprietary flashing material. It is a relatively malleable material, making it useful for complex roofing connections. It provides normal soft soldering capabilities and delivers easy folding. Soft zinc is said to be an \"environmentally friendly\" replacement for lead flashing; like lead, it is recyclable, while avoiding lead-contaminated runoff. \n\nFlashing types are named according to location or shape:\n\nA structure incorporating flashing has to be carefully engineered and constructed so that water is directed away from the structure and not inside. Flashing improperly installed can direct water into a building.\n\nIn the US and UK, at least, lead flashing and fittings are still readily available, despite the environmental concerns associated with bulk use of this heavy metal. The Lead Sheet Association touts its recyclability and extreme durability. ",
  "The Laugh-O-Gram Studio (also called Laugh-O-Gram Studios ) was an animation studio located on the second floor of the McConahay Building at 1127 East 31st in Kansas City, Missouri , that operated from June 28, 1921, to October 16, 1923.\n\nIn the early years of animation , the studio was home to many of the pioneers of animation, brought there by Walt Disney . It was the site of inspiration for Disney and Ub Iwerks to create Mickey Mouse . Laugh-O-Gram is the subject of two feature films: As Dreamers Do and Walt Before Mickey .\n\nIn 1921, Walt Disney was contracted by Milton Feld to animate twelve cartoons, which he called Newman's Laugh-O-Grams. [ ChWDC 1 ] On May 23, 1922, when Disney was 20 years old, Laugh-O-Gram Films (LOGF) was incorporated by him using the remaining assets of the defunct Iwerks-Disney Commercial Artists from local investors. LOGF produced nine of the requested 12 films with little income. [ ChWDC 2 ] Encouraged and inspired by his shorts' popularity at the theatre, Disney decided he wanted to make his own animated versions of fairy tales too, and invested six months on his first attempt at Little Red Riding Hood . \n\nAmong Disney's employees on the series were several pioneers of animation: Ub Iwerks , Hugh Harman , Friz Freleng , and Carman Maxwell . The company had financial problems and by the end of 1922, Disney was living in the office and taking baths once a week at Union Station .\n\nDuring the studio's sales manager Leslie Mace's stay in New York, where he was looking for distributors, he ended up signing a contract for six animated shorts with Pictorial Clubs, Inc. of Tennessee on Sunday, September 16, 1922. Pictorial agreed to pay US$11,000 (equivalent to $206,638 in 2024) for the cartoons, which were supposed to be shown at schools and other non-theatrical places, but only paid $100 in advance. The rest of the payment would have to wait until January 1, 1924, when all the shorts had been delivered. When Pictorial went bankrupt only a few months later, the studio never received the rest of the payment, its financial problems became even more serious, and the staff ended up leaving. When the local Kansas City dentist Thomas B. McCrum, from the Deener Dental Institute, contacted Disney and offered him the job of producing a short subject about dental hygiene intended for the Missouri school system, he brought together some of his staff again and made Tommy Tucker's Tooth , which earned the studio $500. Instead of paying off his creditors, the money was invested in the live-action/animation demonstration film Alice's Wonderland , starring the youthful Virginia Davis . Disney had noted how popular the Out of the Inkwell series from the Fleischer Studios was, which had animated characters interacting with the real world. By reversing this gimmick and using a real-life character in a cartoon universe instead, he hoped for a hit.\nVirginia Davis's contract with Laugh-O-Gram was signed by her parents on April 23, 1923, with terms giving her 5% of the Alice's Wonderland film's receipts. [ ChWDC 3 ] Looking for a distributor for Alice's Wonderland on May 14, Disney wrote to Margaret Winkler , a New York film distributor. [ ChWDC 4 ]\n\nAfter finishing the raw edits of Alice's Wonderland , [ ChWDC 5 ] the studio filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in July 1923. [ ChWDC 6 ] Disney finally made some money by shooting a film of a 6-month-old girl named Kathalee Viley and selling his movie camera , earning enough for a one-way train ticket, moving to Hollywood, California ; he brought along an unfinished reel of Alice's Wonderland .\n\nThe bankruptcy trustee was able to force LOGF's erstwhile distributor and debtor, Pictorial Films, Inc., to pay LOGF's agents the sum owed while agreeing that Pictorial could exercise its contractual distribution rights for LOGF works and to purchase several of LOGF's films: The Four Musicians of Bremen , Jack the Giant Killer , the Lafflets series, and Alice's Wonderland . \n\nThe studio building fell to ruin and efforts were made to restore it by a non-profit group called \"Thank You, Walt Disney\". The Disney family promised $450,000 in matching funds for the rights to other Disney memorabilia and to tell the history of Walt Disney's life in Kansas City, a movie house to exhibit original and restored Laugh-O-Grams, and an education center for animation workshops. \n\nOn July 30, 2021, a black Dodge Charger struck the building and caused significant damage to the exterior. The incident occurred early in the morning, the driver fleeing the scene, though authorities subsequently found a woman's driving license and a margarita within the vehicle. Butch Rigby, who launched the campaign to save and restore the building, described the incident optimistically: \"The bottom line, it's a bump in the road, but it could have been worse\". \n\nDisney told interviewers that the inspiration to draw Mickey came from a tame mouse at his desk at Laugh-O-Gram Studio in Kansas City, Missouri .\n\nThey used to fight for little pieces of cheese in my waste-basket when I worked alone late at night. I lifted them out and kept them in wire cages on my desk. I grew particularly fond of one brown house mouse. He was a timid little guy. By tapping him on the nose with my pencil, I trained him to run inside a black circle I drew on my drawing board. When I left Kansas City to try my luck at Hollywood, I hated to leave him behind. So I carefully carried him to a backyard, making sure it was a nice neighborhood, and the tame little fellow scampered to freedom. \n\nIn 1928 during a train trip to New York, he showed the drawing to his wife Lillian Marie Bounds and said he was going to call it \"Mortimer Mouse\". She replied that the name sounded \"too pompous\" and suggested Mickey Mouse instead. \n\nOf the original seven Laugh-O-Grams fairy tales, four were long known to have survived, and have been restored for DVD: Newman Laugh-O-Grams (1921), Little Red Riding Hood (1922), The Four Musicians of Bremen (1922), Puss in Boots (1922), and Cinderella (1922). These shorts later became available on Blu-ray Disc as bonus features for Disney's Beauty and the Beast . Tommy Tucker's Tooth (1922) and Alice's Wonderland (1923) are also available on DVD, and Alice's Wonderland eventually became a bonus feature for the 60th Anniversary Blu-ray Edition of Alice in Wonderland . The original piece of filming and animation known as Newman Laugh-O-Grams (originally released theatrically on March 20, 1921) is available on some DVDs too. In accordance with United States copyright law, all 11 shorts produced by the studio have entered into the public domain as of 2019. \n\nThe missing fairy tale cartoons were Jack and the Beanstalk , Jack the Giant Killer , and Goldie Locks and the Three Bears (all 1922). In October 2010, copies of all three cartoons had been found according to animation historian David Gerstein . For many years the two Jack cartoons were believed to be one, until researcher John Kenworthy located old studio assets sheets confirming that they were separate shorts. ",
  "Opérateur de transport de Wallonie ( French pronunciation: [ɔpeʁatœʁ də tʁɑ̃spɔʁ də walɔni] , Transport Operator of Wallonia , OTW ), formerly Société régionale wallonne du transport ( [sɔsjete ʁeʒjɔnal walɔn dy tʁɑ̃spɔʁ] , Walloon Regional Transport Company , SRWT ), is responsible for the supervision, strategic planning and marketing of a group of five regional public transport directorate branded as TEC or \"Transport En Commun\" (French for: Public Transport ) in Wallonia , Belgium . It is primarily a bus operator, but also operates the Charleroi light rail system and the light rail line in Liège . \n\nTEC sells the MOBIB smartcard branded \"TEC it easy\" and runs a chain of shops called Espace TEC. Most of TEC buses and trams in Charleroi are distinctively painted yellow and red.\n\nTEC was founded in 1991 through the breakup of the former Belgian NMVB/SNCV into separate companies for Wallonia and Flanders . In 2019, Société régionale wallonne du Transport (SRWT) became Opérateur de transport de Wallonie (OTW).",
  "Lightning rod fashion was a fad in late eighteenth-century Europe after the lightning rod , invented by Benjamin Franklin , was introduced. Lightning rod hats for ladies and lightning umbrellas for gentlemen were most popular in France, especially in Paris. The concept that inspired the fashion was that a lightning bolt would strike the Franklin-designed protective device instead of the person, and then the electricity would travel down a small metal chain into the ground harmlessly. The technology was already used to some extent in France to protect wooden buildings, and was therefore an accepted science concept that developed into a temporary fashion.\n\nThe lightning rod, invented by Franklin in the mid-eighteenth century to protect wooden structures, did not become commonplace in the United States until the nineteenth century, over fifty years after he first unveiled the concept. However, his experiments made electricity a fashionable topic in European society. \n\nIn 1778, experiments were performed testing the concept of placing a lightning rod above a person's head, in an accessory, to protect them from lightning strikes. A woven metal ribbon was placed around a lady's hat, and a small chain made of silver was attached to the ribbon. The chain was meant to run down the back of the lady's dress and drag on the ground. The electricity of a lightning strike to the ribbon would theoretically travel down the chain and into the ground, thus protecting the wearer of the hat. The supposed protection that this type of hat offered made it a popular Paris fashion trend in 1778. The lightning hat was called le chapeau paratonnerre in French. \n\nA gentleman's 1778 version of the lightning hat involved an umbrella with a tip extended into a pointed rod. A metal chain ran from the rod over the exterior of the open umbrella and down onto the ground, thus providing a conduit for the lightning to follow. In French, the lightning umbrella was called le parapluie-paratonnerre . \n\nThe French physician and writer Claude Jean Veau Delaunay demonstrated a portable, telescoping lightning rod that was 6 metres (20 feet) long when fully extended. This was intended for use by people in open areas, such as a farmers in their fields. \n\nIn the humorous play Le Palais de Cristal ou les Parisiens à Londres ( ' The Crystal Palace or the Parisians in London ' ), written on the occasion of the Great Exhibition 1851 by Clairville and Éléonore Tenaille de Vaulabelle (under the pseudonym Jules Cordier), there is a scene presenting a version of the lightning hat ( chapeau paratonnerre ) as a \"Chinese invention\". ",
  "Nikita Sergeyevich Mikhalkov ( Russian : Никита Сергеевич Михалков ; born 21 October 1945) is a Russian filmmaker and actor. He made his directorial debut with the Red Western film At Home Among Strangers (1974) after appearing in a series of films, including the romantic comedy Walking the Streets of Moscow (1964), the war drama The Red and the White (1967), the romantic drama A Nest of Gentry (1969) and the adventure drama The Red Tent (1969). His subsequent films include the romantic comedy-drama A Slave of Love (1976), the drama An Unfinished Piece for Mechanical Piano (1977), the romantic drama Five Evenings (1978), the historical drama Siberiade (1979), the romantic comedy Station for Two (1983), the drama Without Witness (1983) and the romantic comedy-drama Dark Eyes (1987). Mikhalkov then directed, co-wrote and appeared in the adventure drama film Close to Eden (1991), for which he received the Golden Lion at the Venice International Film Festival and an Academy Award nomination.\n\nFollowing the Soviet Union 's dissolution , Mikhalkov directed, co-wrote and starred in the historical drama Burnt by the Sun (1994), for which he won the Grand Prix at the Cannes Film Festival and the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. He received the \"Special Lion\" at the Venice Film Festival for his contribution to the cinematography and an Academy Award nomination for the legal drama 12 (2007).\n\nMikhalkov is a three-time laureate of the State Prize of the Russian Federation (1993, 1995, 1999) and Full Cavalier of the Order \"For Merit to the Fatherland\" .\n\nMikhalkov was born in Moscow into the noble and distinguished Mikhalkov family . His great-grandfather was the imperial governor of Yaroslavl , whose mother was a princess of the House of Golitsyn . Nikita's father, Sergey Mikhalkov , was best known as writer of children's literature, although he also wrote lyrics to his country's national anthem on three occasions spanning nearly 60 years – two sets of lyrics used for the Soviet national anthem , and the current lyrics of the Russian national anthem . Mikhalkov's mother, poet Natalia Konchalovskaya, was the daughter of the avant-garde artist Pyotr Konchalovsky and granddaughter of another outstanding painter, Vasily Surikov . Nikita's older brother is the filmmaker Andrei Konchalovsky , primarily known for his collaboration with Andrei Tarkovsky and his own Hollywood action films, such as Runaway Train and Tango & Cash .\n\nMikhalkov studied acting at the children's studio of the Moscow Art Theatre and later at the Shchukin School of the Vakhtangov Theatre . While still a student, he appeared in Georgiy Daneliya 's film Walking the Streets of Moscow (1964) and his brother Andrei Konchalovsky's film Home of the Gentry (1969). He was soon on his way to becoming a star of the Soviet stage and cinema.\n\nWhile continuing to pursue his acting career, he entered VGIK , the state film school in Moscow, where he studied directing under filmmaker Mikhail Romm , teacher to his brother and Andrei Tarkovsky . He directed his first short film in 1968, I'm Coming Home, and another for his graduation, A Quiet Day at the End of the War in 1970. Mikhalkov had appeared in more than 20 films, including his brother's Uncle Vanya (1972), before he co-wrote, directed and starred in his first feature, At Home Among Strangers in 1974, an Ostern set just after the 1920s civil war in Russia .\n\nMikhalkov established an international reputation with his second feature, A Slave of Love (1976). Set in 1917, it followed the efforts of a film crew to make a silent melodrama in a resort town while the Revolution rages around them. The film, based upon the last days of Vera Kholodnaya , was highly acclaimed upon its release in the U.S.\n\nMikhalkov's next film, An Unfinished Piece for Mechanical Piano (1977) was adapted by Mikhalkov from Chekhov 's early play, Platonov , and won the first prize at the San Sebastián International Film Festival . In 1978, while starring in his brother's epic film Siberiade , Mikhalkov made Five Evenings, a love story about a couple separated by World War II , who meet again after eighteen years. Mikhalkov's next film, A Few Days from the Life of I. I. Oblomov (1980), with Oleg Tabakov in the title role, is based on Ivan Goncharov 's classic novel about a lazy young nobleman who refuses to leave his bed. Family Relations (1981) is a comedy about a provincial woman in Moscow dealing with the tangled relationships of her relatives. Without Witness (1983) tracks a long night's conversation between a woman ( Irina Kupchenko ) and her ex-husband ( Mikhail Ulyanov ) when they are accidentally locked in a room. The film won the Prix FIPRESCI at the 13th Moscow International Film Festival . \n\nIn the early 1980s, Mikhalkov resumed his acting career, appearing in Eldar Ryazanov 's immensely popular Station for Two (1982) and A Cruel Romance (1984). At that period, he also played Henry Baskerville in the Soviet screen version of The Hound of the Baskervilles . He also starred in many of his own films, including At Home Among Strangers , A Slave of Love, and An Unfinished Piece for Player Piano .\n\nIncorporating several short stories by Chekhov, Dark Eyes (1987) stars Marcello Mastroianni as an old man who tells a story of a romance he had when he was younger, a woman he has never been able to forget. The film was highly praised, and Mastroianni received the Best Actor Prize at the 1987 Cannes Film Festival and an Academy Award nomination for his performance.\n\nMikhalkov's next film, Urga (1992, a.k.a. Close to Eden ), set in the little-known world of the Mongols , received the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . Mikhalkov's Anna: 6–18 (1993) documents his daughter Anna as she grows from childhood to maturity.\n\nMikhalkov's most famous production to date, Burnt by the Sun (1994), was steeped in the paranoid atmosphere of Joseph Stalin 's Great Terror . The film received the Grand Prize at Cannes and the Academy Award for Best International Feature Film , among many other honors. To date, Burnt by the Sun remains the highest-grossing film to come out of the former Soviet Union .\n\nIn 1996, he was the head of the jury at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival . \n\nMikhalkov used the critical and financial triumph of Burnt by the Sun to raise $25 million for his most epic venture to date, The Barber of Siberia (1998). The film, which was screened out of competition at the 1999 Cannes Film Festival , was designed as a patriotic extravaganza for domestic consumption. It featured Julia Ormond and Oleg Menshikov , who regularly appears in Mikhalkov's films, in the leading roles. The director himself appeared as Tsar Alexander III of Russia .\n\nThe film received the Russian State Prize and spawned rumours about Mikhalkov's presidential ambitions. The director, however, chose to administer the Russian cinema industry. Despite much opposition from rival directors, he was elected the President of the Russian Society of Cinematographers and has managed the Moscow Film Festival since 2000. He also set the Russian Academy Golden Eagle Award in opposition to the traditional Nika Award . [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 2005, Mikhalkov resumed his acting career, starring in three brand-new movies – The Councillor of State , a Fandorin mystery film which broke the Russian box-office records, Dead Man's Bluff , a noir-drenched comedy about the Russian Mafia , and Krzysztof Zanussi 's Persona non grata .\n\nIn 2007, Mikhalkov directed and starred in 12 , a Russian adaptation of Sidney Lumet 's court drama 12 Angry Men . In September 2007, 12 received a special Golden Lion for the “consistent brilliance” of its work and was praised by many critics at the Venice Film Festival . In 2008, 12 was named as a nominee for Best Foreign Language Film for the 80th Academy Awards . Commenting on the nomination, Mikhalkov said, \"I am overjoyed that the movie has been noticed in the United States and, what's more, was included in the shortlist of five nominees. This is a significant event for me.\"\n\nHe also served as the executive producer of an epic film 1612 .\n\nMikhalkov presented his \"epic drama\" Burnt by the Sun 2 at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival , but did not receive any awards. The film was selected in 2011 as the Russian entry for the Best International Feature Film at the 84th Academy Awards . \n\nMikhalkov's first wife was renowned Russian actress Anastasiya Vertinskaya , whom he married on 6 March 1967. They had a son, Stepan (born September 1966).\n\nWith his second wife, former model Tatyana, he had a son Artyom (born 8 December 1975), and daughters Anna (born 1974) and Nadya (born 27 September 1986).\n\nMikhalkov is actively involved in Russian politics. He is known for his at times Russian nationalist and Slavophile views. Mikhalkov was instrumental in propagating Ivan Ilyin 's ideas in post-Soviet Russia. He authored several articles about Ilyin and came up with the idea of transferring his remains from Switzerland to the Donskoy Monastery in Moscow, where the philosopher had dreamed to find his last retreat. The ceremony of reburial, also of Anton Denikin , a general whose slogan was ‘Russia, one and indivisible’ was held on 3 October 2005.\n\nIn October 2006, Mikhalkov visited Serbia , giving moral support to Serbia's sovereignty over Kosovo . In 2008, he visited Serbia to support Tomislav Nikolić who was running as the ultra-nationalist candidate for the Serb presidency at the time. Mikhalkov took part in a meeting of \" Nomocanon \", a Serb youth organization which denies war crimes committed by Serbs in the 1992–99 Yugoslav Wars . In a speech given to the organization, Mikhalkov spoke about a \"war against Orthodoxy\" wherein he cited Orthodox Christianity as \"the main force which opposes cultural and intellectual McDonald's \". In response to his statement, a journalist asked Mikhalkov: \"Which is better, McDonald's or Stalinism ?\" Mikhalkov answered: \"That depends on the person\". Mikhalkov has described himself as a monarchist . \n\nMikhalkov has been a strong supporter of Russian president Vladimir Putin . In October 2007, Mikhalkov, who produced a television program for Putin's 55th birthday, co-signed an open letter asking Putin not to step down after the expiry of his term in office. \n\nMikhalkov's vertical of power -style leadership of the Cinematographers' Union has been criticized by many prominent Russian filmmakers and critics as autocratic, and encouraged many members to leave and form a rival union in April 2010. \n\nIn 2015, Mikhalkov was banned from entering Ukraine for 5 years because of his support for the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea . Despite his support for the annexation of Crimea he also called for the release of imprisoned Ukrainian filmmaker Oleg Sentsov . \n\nOn 24 February 2022, he advocated the international recognition of the Donetsk People's Republic and the Luhansk People's Republic by Russia and supported 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine , citing betrayal by Ukraine and the killings of Donbas residents. He also criticized those Russian cultural figures who oppose Russia's invasion, arguing that they were silent about the crimes against Donbas, and now, in his opinion, they are only saving their property abroad from sanctions and teaching their children there. \n\nIn December 2022 the EU sanctioned Mikhalkov in relation to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine . In January 2023, Ukraine imposed sanctions on Mikhalkov for his support of 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine . ",
  "1993\n\n1994\n\n1995\n\nScott Francis O'Grady (born October 12, 1965) is a former United States Air Force (USAF) fighter pilot . On June 2, 1995, he was shot down over Bosnia and Herzegovina by a 2K12 Kub (NATO designation SA-6 \"Gainful\") mobile SAM launcher and forced to eject from his F-16C into hostile territory. US Marines from heavy-helicopter squadron HMH-464 and the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit [ a ] eventually rescued O'Grady after nearly a week of his evading the Bosnian Serbs . He was previously involved in the Banja Luka incident when he had fired upon six enemy aircraft. The 2001 film Behind Enemy Lines is loosely based upon his experience.\n\nIn September 2011, O'Grady announced a run for the 2012 Republican nomination for Texas State Senate District 8 , held at the time by the retiring Republican Florence Shapiro , but he later suspended his campaign because of uncertainties over the Texas redistricting fight . In November 2020, President Donald Trump stated an official intention to nominate O'Grady as the next Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs . The nomination was submitted to the Senate for confirmation on November 30, 2020. Before and during the nomination, O'Grady had spread numerous debunked conspiracy theories regarding the 2020 United States presidential election , and calls by Michael Flynn for Trump to institute martial law . \n\nThe Bosnian War was an international armed conflict that took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina between April 1992 and December 1995. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) decided to intervene in the Bosnian War after allegations of war crimes against civilians were made by various media organizations. NATO military involvement primarily involved enforcement of a no-fly zone codenamed Operation Deny Flight to discourage Bosnian Serb military aircraft from attacking Bosnian government and Bosnian Croat forces. In February 1994, Grady was involved in the Banja Luka incident where he, along with several other F-16 pilots, engaged Bosnian Serb jets who were in violation of the no-fly zone. Later, as part of the 555th Fighter Squadron based at Aviano Air Base , Italy, he was piloting one of two F-16s patrolling the skies above Bosnia on June 2, 1995. \n\nOn the ground, a Bosnian Serb army 2K12 Kub surface-to-air missile battery near Mrkonjić Grad was readying to fire its missiles on NATO aircraft. These Serbs had moved the mobile-tracked missile battery and laid a trap. They switched on their missile radars intermittently, giving F-16 fighters little warning. Waiting until a plane was directly overhead, where the aircraft's warning and countermeasures would be at their weakest, they fired two missiles. In the cockpit, O'Grady's instruments alerted him that a missile was coming, but, because he was flying through an overcast sky, he could not see it. The first missile exploded between the two aircraft. The second struck the F-16 piloted by O'Grady. His flight lead, Captain Robert Gordon \"Wilbur\" Wright, saw O'Grady's plane burst into flames and break in two. Wright did not see a parachute, but O'Grady survived by ejecting from the aircraft . \n\nO'Grady landed among a Bosnian Serb population that he was briefed would be unfriendly. He quickly secured a 29-pound (13 kg) survival bag, ran, and hid. Rubbing dirt on his face, he hid face-down as Bosnian Serb forces came upon his parachute, half a dozen times shooting their rifles only feet from where he was hidden in an effort to flush him out or kill him. \n\nDuring the next six days, he put to use the lessons learned during a 17-day Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape (SERE) training session he had undertaken near his hometown of Spokane, Washington . He ate leaves, grass, and bugs, and stored the little rainwater he could collect with a sponge in plastic bags. \n\nO'Grady radioed for help immediately but had to remain quiet with paramilitaries coming within feet of him; he used the radio following standard operating procedures as the U.S. Air Force had taught him so as not to give away his position to unfriendly forces. On his 6th night on the ground he made radio contact, signalling his location using his radio's limited battery power. NATO warplanes conducting sorties in the Balkans had been picking up beeper snippets that they thought could be coming from O'Grady. This extremely sensitive information was inadvertently revealed by General Ronald Fogleman , the Air Force Chief of Staff , when the general told reporters attending a promotion ceremony that monitors had detected \"intermittent\" transmissions. A NATO official was quoted as saying \"I was dumbfounded he said that... I mean, why not just announce to the bad guys, 'We think he's alive and kicking, and we hope we find him before you do'?\" \n\nJust after midnight on June 8, O'Grady spoke into the radio. An F-16 pilot, Captain Thomas \"T.O.\" Hanford, from the 510th responded and, after confirming his identity, the rescue was set in motion. At 0440 local time, USAF General Michael Ryan and Navy Admiral Leighton Smith , commander of NATO Southern Forces, called US Marine Corps Colonel Martin Berndt aboard USS Kearsarge with orders to \"execute\". \n\nTwo CH-53 Sea Stallions with 51 marines from the 3rd Battalion, 8th Marines within the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit lifted off USS Kearsarge to rescue the pilot. The two helicopters were accompanied by two Marine Corps AH-1W Supercobra helicopter gunships and a pair of Marine Corps AV-8B Harrier jump jets, one piloted by Captain Ronald C. Walkerwicz. These six aircraft had support from identical sets of replacement helicopters and jump jets as well as two Navy EA-6B Prowler electronic warfare planes, two Air Force EF-111A Raven electronic warfare planes, two Marine F/A-18D Hornets , a pair of anti-tank Air Force A-10 Thunderbolts , an SH-60B from USS Ticonderoga , and an RAF AWACS E-3D. \n\nAt 0635, the helicopters approached the area where O'Grady's signal beacon had been traced. The pilots saw bright yellow smoke coming from trees near a rocky pasture where O'Grady had set off a flare. The first Sea Stallion, commanded by Major William Tarbutton, touched down and 20 Marines jumped off the aircraft and set up a defensive perimeter. As the second Sea Stallion, commanded by Captains Paul Fortunato and James Wright, landed, a figure with a pistol who turned out to be the missing pilot appeared running towards the Marines and immediately went to the Sea Stallion. As the side door opened, he was pulled in before the second 20 Marines poised to leave by the rear ramp could even move. They were called back to their seats, and those who had formed the defensive perimeter reboarded the other helicopter. After a quick head count, the Stallions took off. They had been on the ground no more than seven minutes. \n\nThe Marines, with O'Grady, flew low over Serb-held Bosnia. However, American aircraft detected a Serb missile radar along the Croatian coast, scanning for targets. An American plane recommended destroying the Serb radar, code-named Giraffe. The request was denied, partly out of concern that a strike could spark wider conflict. \n\nMinutes later, the Marines reported they were under fire. Three shoulder-launched surface-to-air missiles had been fired at them but missed, as the helicopter pilots—flying 150 feet (46 m) off the ground at 175 mph (282 km/h)—jinked to evade them. Serb small arms pocked both helicopters; the Marines aboard heard the bullets hit inside the fuselage. One door gunner returned fire. One round hit some communication gear in the chopper and hitting Sergeant Major Angel Castro Jr.'s armor without injuring anyone. At 0715 local time, 30 minutes after picking up O'Grady, the rescuers reported \"feet wet\", meaning they were over water. O'Grady was back aboard the Kearsarge at 0730. All of the aircraft landed without further incident.\n\nOn August 11, 1995, a USAF RQ-1 Predator drone was shot down by Serb forces in the same area. The Serbs recovered the wreckage and handed it over to Russia for technical evaluation. On August 30, NATO launched Operation Deliberate Force , a massive airstrike campaign which eventually lifted the siege of Sarajevo and led to the end of the war in Bosnia. \n\nO'Grady received a Bronze Star and Purple Heart for this mission. \n\nIn November 2020, President Donald Trump announced his intent to nominate O'Grady to be an Assistant Secretary of Defense (International Security Affairs). The President justified this intent to appoint by citing O'Grady's combat experience, his book Return With Honor , and Master's degree in Theology from Dallas Theological Seminary and Honorary Doctorate of Public Service from the University of Portland in Oregon.\n\nShortly before and during the nomination period, O'Grady promoted conspiracy-theories about the 2020 United States presidential election , including claims that Trump won the election in a \"landslide fashion\", that millions of votes were \"stolen from [Trump]\", and that Hillary Clinton and George Soros were involved in helping foreign agents interfere in the election. Additionally, O'Grady signaled support for conspiracy theories by Sidney Powell alleging an international conspiracy of politicians, CIA agents, communists, and deceased former president of Venezuela Hugo Chavez working with Dominion Voting Systems to rig the election for Biden; retweeted attacks calling former Defense Secretary James Mattis a \"traitor\"; and endorsed a petition allegedly shared by former national security advisor Michael Flynn which recommended Trump declare martial law to overturn the election. \n\nOn January 3, 2021, his nomination was returned to the President under Rule XXXI, Paragraph 6 of the United States Senate . \n\nOn December 14, 2020 the Department of Defense announced that the Trump administration nominated O'Grady to the Defense Policy Board , as a part of a slate of replacement nominations for the 11 board members who were abruptly fired in November 2020. O'Grady was sworn in as the board member on January 19, 2021, the last full day of Trump's presidency, under pressure from the White House to complete his and other similar nominations. Following the election of President Joe Biden , Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin ordered a \"zero-based review\" of all the Pentagon advisory boards and fired all of the members appointed by the DoD, including all the Defense Policy Board members, effective February 16, 2021. \n\nO'Grady was born in Brooklyn , New York City , a son of William P. O'Grady and Mary Lou Scardapane, and graduated from Lewis and Clark High School in Spokane, Washington . He is a former cadet in the Civil Air Patrol and a 1989 Air Force ROTC graduate from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University 's campus in Prescott, Arizona . After his rescue, O'Grady transferred from active duty in the regular U.S. Air Force to the Air Force Reserve , where he continued to fly the F-16. In May 2007, he completed a master's degree in biblical studies at Dallas Theological Seminary in Dallas , Texas. He resides in Frisco in Collin County, Texas . \n\nO'Grady is an active Republican , having spoken at the 1996 Republican convention in support of Bob Dole . In 2004, O'Grady, supporting George W. Bush for re-election, accused Bush's opponent John Kerry of \"treason\" for actions taken during the Vietnam War . O'Grady endorsed Brian Birdwell in his successful 2010 bid for the Texas State Senate , then launched his own candidacy for the Texas state house in September 2011, seeking the 2012 Republican nomination in Senate District 8 following the retirement of Sen. Florence Shapiro . O'Grady dropped out of the race in early 2012, claiming Shapiro had reneged on a promise to support him in the Republican primary, while his opponent had numerous endorsements. \n\nThe shootdown incident was depicted and described on the documentary television program Situation Critical in episode No. 5, \"Downed Pilot\". This has been shown on the National Geographic Channel. It was also covered in \"Escape! – Escape From Bosnia: The Scott O'Grady Story\" on the History Channel . The BBC also made a documentary, titled \"Missing in Action\", that was later purchased by 20th Century Fox and Discovery Communications .\n\nThe 2001 film Behind Enemy Lines , starring Gene Hackman and Owen Wilson , is loosely based on this event. Although O'Grady had given the film a positive rating on the film review television show Hot Or Not, O'Grady took offense at the portrayal of 'his' character in Behind Enemy Lines \"as a pilot who disobeys orders and swears\". O'Grady sued 20th Century Fox in 2002 for falsely misleading the public that the film was true to life. He also took action over the documentary, Behind Enemy Lines: The Scott O'Grady Story , which was a re-edited version of a BBC documentary which Discovery Communications, parent company of the Discovery Channel , had purchased and edited. The documentary was broadcast several times on the Discovery Channel, and O'Grady accused Fox of using it to promote the film. Both suits were settled in 2004. Fox made a confidential settlement with O'Grady, while a Texas court ruled against O'Grady and in favor of Discovery Communications. The judge's ruling stated, in effect, that the events in a person's life are not the same thing as that person's likeness or image. \n\nO'Grady co-wrote two books, collaborating on one, with Michael French, that detailed his experiences of being shot down over Bosnia and his eventual rescue, Basher Five-Two: The True Story of F-16 Fighter Pilot Captain Scott O'Grady. He first wrote a book that was a New York Times Bestseller about his experience in Return with Honor with Jeff Coplon. Another book has also been written; this one, \"Good To Go:\" The Rescue of Capt. Scott O'Grady, USAF, from Bosnia, was written by Mary Pat Kelly. ",
  "God\n\nSchools\n\nRelations with:\n\nAn antipope ( Latin : antipapa ) is a person who claims to be Bishop of Rome and leader of the Roman Catholic Church in opposition to the legitimately elected pope . Between the 3rd and mid-15th centuries, antipopes were supported by factions within the Church itself and secular rulers.\n\nSometimes it was difficult to distinguish which of two claimants should be called pope and which antipope, as in the case of Pope Leo VIII and Pope Benedict V . \n\nHippolytus of Rome (d. 235) is commonly considered to be the earliest antipope, as he headed a separate group within the Church in Rome against Pope Callixtus I . Hippolytus was reconciled to Callixtus's second successor, Pope Pontian , and both he and Pontian are honoured as saints by the Catholic Church with a shared feast day on 13 August. Whether two or more persons have been confused in this account of Hippolytus and whether Hippolytus actually declared himself to be the Bishop of Rome remains unclear, since no such claim by Hippolytus has been cited in the writings attributed to him.\n\nEusebius quotes from an unnamed earlier writer the story of Natalius, a 3rd-century priest who accepted the bishopric of the Adoptionists , a heretical group in Rome. Natalius soon repented and tearfully begged Pope Zephyrinus to receive him into communion. \n\nNovatian (d. 258), another third-century figure, certainly claimed the See of Rome in opposition to Pope Cornelius , and if Natalius and Hippolytus were excluded because of the uncertainties concerning them, Novatian could then be said to be the first antipope.\n\nThe period in which antipopes were most numerous was during the struggles between the popes and the Holy Roman Emperors of the 11th and 12th centuries. The emperors frequently imposed their own nominees to further their own causes. The popes, likewise, sometimes sponsored rival imperial claimants ( anti-kings ) in Germany to overcome a particular emperor.\n\nThe Western Schism – which began in 1378 , when the French cardinals, claiming that the election of Pope Urban VI was invalid, elected antipope Clement VII as a rival to the Roman Pope – led eventually to two competing lines of antipopes: the Avignon line as Clement VII moved back to Avignon , and the Pisan line. The Pisan line, which began in 1409 , was named after the town of Pisa, Italy, where the (Pisan) council had elected antipope Alexander V as a third claimant. To end the schism, in May 1415 , the Council of Constance deposed antipope John XXIII of the Pisan line. Pope Gregory XII of the Roman line resigned in July 1415. In 1417 , the council also formally deposed antipope Benedict XIII of Avignon, but he adamantly refused to resign. Afterwards, Pope Martin V was elected and was accepted everywhere except in the small and rapidly diminishing area of influence of Benedict XIII.\n\nThe following table gives the names of the antipopes included in the list of popes and antipopes in the Annuario Pontificio , with the addition of the names of Natalius (in spite of doubts about his historicity) and Antipope Clement VIII (whose following was insignificant). \n\nAn asterisk marks those who were included in the conventional numbering of later popes who took the same name. More commonly, the antipope is ignored in later papal regnal numbers; for example, there was an Antipope John XXIII , but the new Pope John elected in 1958 was also called John XXIII . For the additional confusion regarding popes named John, see Pope John numbering .\n\nThe list of popes and antipopes in the Annuario Pontificio attaches the following note to the name of Pope Leo VIII (963–965):\n\nAt this point, as again in the mid-11th century, we come across elections in which problems of harmonising historical criteria and those of theology and canon law make it impossible to decide clearly which side possessed the legitimacy whose factual existence guarantees the unbroken lawful succession of the successors of Saint Peter . The uncertainty that in some cases results has made it advisable to abandon the assignation of successive numbers in the list of the popes. \n\nThus, because of the obscurities about mid-11th-century canon law and the historical facts, the Annuario Pontificio lists Sylvester III as a pope, without thereby expressing a judgement on his legitimacy. The Catholic Encyclopedia places him in its List of Popes , but with the annotation: \"Considered by some to be an antipope\". Other sources classify him as an antipope. \n\nAs Celestine II resigned before being consecrated and enthroned in order to avoid a schism, Oxford's A Dictionary of Popes (2010) considers he \"...is classified, unfairly, as an antipope\", an opinion historian Salvador Miranda also shares. \n\nThose with asterisks (*) were counted in subsequent papal numbering.\n\nMany antipopes created cardinals, known as quasi-cardinals , and a few created cardinal-nephews , known as quasi-cardinal-nephews .\n\nAntipopes still exist today, but all are minor claimants, without the support of any Cardinal. Examples include Palmarians , Apostles of Infinite Love Antipopes, and an unknown number of many other Conclavist claimants.\n\nAs the Patriarch of Alexandria ( Egypt ) has historically also held the title of pope , a person who, in opposition to someone who is generally accepted as a legitimate pope of Alexandria , claims to hold that position may also be considered an antipope. Coptic lector Max Michel became an antipope of Alexandria, calling himself Maximos I. His claim to the Alexandrine papacy was dismissed by both the Coptic Orthodox Pope Shenouda III and Pope Theodore II of the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria . The Coptic pope of Alexandria and the Greek pope of Alexandria currently view one another, not as antipopes, but rather as successors to differing lines of apostolic succession that formed as a result of christological disputes in the fifth century. [ citation needed ]\n\nAntipopes have appeared as fictional characters. These may be either in historical fiction , as fictional portraits of well-known historical antipopes or as purely imaginary antipopes.",
  "Club Atlético Peñarol ( Spanish pronunciation: [kluβ aˈtletiko peɲaˈɾol] ⓘ ), more commonly referred to as Peñarol , is a Uruguayan professional football club based in Montevideo . The club currently competes in the Uruguayan Primera División , the highest tier in Uruguayan football.\n\nThe name of the club comes from the neighborhood on the outskirts of Montevideo, which itself takes its name from Pinerolo , a town in the metropolitan area of Turin , in the Italian region of Piedmont . The club's origin dates back to the 28th of September 1891, when the club was initially established as the Central Uruguay Railway Cricket Club (also known by its acronym CURCC ), founded by mostly British railway workers for the practise of cricket . The club was renamed as Peñarol on 13 December 1913; the continuity between the football section of the CURCC and Peñarol has sparked significant controversy in Uruguayan football, as some football pundits have argued that while Peñarol inherited its tradition from the CURCC and there is a sociological continuity between the two, legally they are two separate institutions, as the CURCC would've continued to exist until it's dissolution in 22 January 1915, though merely was by then a recreational branch for the employees of the railway company. However, the Uruguayan Football Association has recognized Peñarol as the continuity of CURCC since 1914. \n\nBy the 1910s, Peñarol began to establish themselves as a promising club in national and international football. The introduction of the FIFA World Cup in 1930 helped elevate the presence of Uruguayan football, including Peñarol; several members of the team were products of the club. The start of the 1940s ushered in a golden generation for Peñarol, as the following four decades the club would have won several international tournaments led by generational talents including Diego Aguirre , Néstor Gonçalves , Fernando Morena , Juan Alberto Schiaffino , and Alberto Spencer . By the 1990s, Peñarol experienced a decline in form, with fewer domestic and international titles compared to the previous decades. However, the club has seen a resurgence in international competition since the 2010s.\n\nAlthough the original colors of the CURCC were black and orange, Peñarol has consistently identified with yellow and black throughout its history, inspired by the Stephenson's Rocket and the railway workers' union. The club throughout its history has also participated in other sports, such as athletics , basketball , cycling , futsal , rugby union , and women's football . Its main focus, however, has always been on men's football , a sport in which the club excels. The club currently host their matches at the 40,000-capacity Estadio Campeón del Siglo since 2016, having previously played at Estadio Centenario since 1933. Peñarol currently have 80,000 associates. \n\nPeñarol is considered one of the most prestigious football clubs in the sport. In September 2009, the club was recognized as the best South American club of the 20th century by the IFFHS . In international competition, Peñarol is the third-highest Copa Libertadores winner, having won it on five editions ( 1960 , 1961 , 1966 , 1982 , and 1987 ), and shares the record for Intercontinental Cup victories with three ( 1961 , 1966 , and 1982 ). In domestic football, Peñarol has won 42 tournaments in its era, and considering the titles won by their predecessor, it has claimed 51 championships overall. The club has never been relegated and has many long-standing rivalries, most notably El Clásico Uruguayo with Club Nacional de Football . The derby is considered one of the oldest in international football, with their first meeting on 15 July 1900 with a 2-0 victory. Since then, they have faced each other in more than 500 occasions. As of 2024, Peñarol currently holds the advantage in the head-to-head record. \n\nOn 28 September 1891, employees of the Central Uruguay Railway Company established the Central Uruguay Railway Cricket Club (CURCC) of Montevideo, with the purpose of stimulating the practice of cricket , rugby football and \"other male sports\" (literal from the Spanish). [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Central Uruguay Railway company had operated in Uruguay since 1878, with 118 employees, 72 British, 45 Uruguayan and one German. The club was known as CURCC in the neighborhood of Peñarol—the latter from the Peñarol neighborhood, about 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) from Montevideo , whose name in turn derived from an Italian city . The club's first president was Frank Henderson, who remained in that position until 1899. \n\nIn 1892, the CURCC shifted its focus from cricket and rugby to association football. The football club's first game was against a team of students from the English high school and ended with a 2–0 victory. In 1895, Uruguayan footballer Julio Negrón was chosen as the team's first non-British captain . \n\nIn 1900 the CURCC was one of four charter members of the Uruguay Association Football League, making its debut in official competition on 10 June against Albion and winning 2–1. The club won its first Uruguayan championship that year, repeating in 1901 , 1905 and 1907 . In 1906 Charles W. Bayne took over the railroad, and refused to sponsor the football team due to financial and work issues. Conflict between the company and the football club led to the severance of their relationship in 1913. \n\nIn 1908, the club left the Uruguayan league after the league rejected their request to replay a game with F.C. Dublín. CURCC had lost 2–3 on the road, and believed their poor showing was due to refereeing mistakes caused by pressure from rabid home fans. As a sign of good faith, Nacional also retired from the league, since both teams agreed that \"Los Partidos se ganan en la Cancha\", or \"matches are won on the pitch\". Back in competition the following year, relations between the CUR and the club became frostier after fans burned a train car used for rival teams.\n\nA year after the club's 1911 Uruguayan championship , the club attempted reforms to its policies. Proposals included greater participation by non-CUR players and a name change to \"CURCC Peñarol\". In June 1913, the proposals were rejected; the company wanted to distance itself from the club's local reputation. The railroad company, decided to separate the \" foot-ball \" section of the team from the company on Saturday 13 December 1913. That is when Peñarol was founded. The following day it was the first time a \" Clasico \" was officially played between Nacional and Peñarol. \n\nCURCC kept playing football in the amateurism until it was dissolved on 22 January 1915 and donated all their trophies to the British Hospital of Montevideo, not to Peñarol.\n\nOn 12 March 1914, Peñarol replaced CURCC's spot in the Uruguayan Football League after its foundation in 1913. A request submitted to the Uruguayan Football League two days later and approved the following day. During its first years Peñarol was not successful, although a new stadium ( Las Acacias ) opened on 19 May 1916. The club won its first two league titles in 1918 and 1920 .\n\nIn November 1922 the Asociación Uruguaya de Fútbol (AUF) disqualified Peñarol because the club played an exhibition game with Racing , an Argentine club affiliated with Asociación Amateurs de Football (a dissident association established in 1919 that rivalized with the official entity, AFA ). Peñarol and other clubs then organised a new league, the Uruguayan Football Federation (FUF), and the club won the 1924 championship. The league was short-lived; Peñarol won the 1926 Copa del Consejo Provisorio, triggering a merger between the AUF and the FUF. \n\nIn 1927, Peñarol made its first tour to Europe, playing a total of 19 matches against teams from Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Spain, Czechoslovakia and France. The tour extended from April to June. The first match of the tour was vs. the Vienna combined, which Peñarol lost by 3–1. The Uruguayan team then played Bayern Munich (1–2), SpVgg (1–2), Hertha BSC (Berlin) (0–1). The first win was v. Eintracht Frankfurt (3–1). The lineup for that match was Luis Biscardi, Demis D’Agosto, José Benincasa, Pascual Ruotta, Gildeón Silva, Antonio Aguerre, Ladislao Pérez, Antonio Sacco, Pablo Terevinto, Peregrín Anselmo, Antonio Campolo. Goals were scored by Suffiotti (2) and Ruotta. The tour continued in Switzerland, v. Young Fellows (1–0), Rapid Vienna (0–5), then facing Sparta Prague (losing by 1–0).\n\nOn 5 June, Peñarol played its first game in Spain v. FC Barcelona , losing by 1–5. The second test was played one day later, finishing in a tie (1–1). Other notable games of the tour were the two tests v. Atlético Madrid (5–2 and 4–3).\n\nPeñarol played a total of 19 matches in 80 days (6 in Spain, 5 in Germany, 4 in Switzerland and 1 in Czechoslovakia and France), totalizing 7 wins, 4 draws and 8 losses. The team scored 32 goals and received 33, with Antonio Sacco being the topscorer with 9 goals. \n\nAfter its first European tour in 1927, Peñarol won the Uruguayan championship in 1928 and 1929 ; the following year, the club defeated Olimpia 1–0 in its first game at the Centenario Stadium in Montevideo.\n\nIn 1932, Peñarol and River Plate played the first game of the professional era. Peñarol won the first Uruguayan professional championship with 40 points, five more than runners-up Rampla Juniors . After placing second in 1933 and 1934, the club won four consecutive league tournaments between 1935 and 1938 ; they also won the 1936 Torneo Competencia.\n\nThe club stayed in second place until 1944 , when Peñarol again won the Uruguayan Championship (defeating Nacional in a two-game final, 0–0 and 3–2). In 1945 the club retained the title, with Nicolás Falero and Raúl Schiaffino the top goal scorers of the playoffs with 21 apiece. Peñarol was again victorious in 1949, four points ahead of runner-up Nacional with Óscar Míguez the top scorer. \n\nAfter placing second in 1950, Peñarol won the Uruguayan Championship the following year ; this was also the start of the Palacio Peñarol's four-year construction. During the 1950s, the club also won national championships in 1953 , 1954 , 1958 and 1959 . \n\nTheir 1959 championship qualified Peñarol for the recently created Copa Libertadores , an international competition then known as the Copa de Campeones de América. Peñarol won the first two tournaments, beating Olimpia of Paraguay in 1960 and Palmeiras of Brazil in 1961 . That year the club won its first Intercontinental Cup , defeating Benfica of Portugal 2–1 in the third game. Peñarol won three more league titles ( 1960 , 1961 and 1962 ), for five consecutive championships. Béla Guttmann coached the team in 1962. \n\nAfter a quiet year in 1963, Peñarol won the Uruguayan Championship in 1964 and 1965 and the Copa Libertadores in 1966 , defeating River Plate 4–2. That year the club won its second Intercontinental Cup , defeating Real Madrid 2–0 in Centenario Stadium and Santiago Bernabéu . During the next few years the club won national championships in 1967 and 1968 and the Intercontinental Champions' Supercup in 1969 (a tournament with South American Intercontinental Cup winners). Peñarol had the longest undefeated run in Uruguayan league history: 56 games, from 3 September 1966 to 14 September 1968. Copa Libertadores all-time top scorer Alberto Spencer played for Peñarol at this time. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 1970 the club again reached the Libertadores final again, losing to Estudiantes de La Plata . The club set a tournament record for greatest goal difference, defeating Valencia of Venezuela 11–2. With Fernando Morena as the team's star, the club won the Uruguayan championship for three consecutive years, from 1973 to 1975. After placing second in 1976 and 1977, Peñarol won again in 1978. That year, Morena set two records: most goals scored in a Uruguayan season (36) and most goals scored in a single game (seven, against Huracán Buceo on 16 July). The 1970s ended with another championship in 1979. Morena was top scorer in the Uruguayan tournament six straight times, and top Copa Libertadores scorer in 1974 and 1975 .\n\nAfter beginning the 1980s with a third-place finish in 1981 , Peñarol won the Uruguayan Championship with Fernando Morena and Rubén Paz (the tournament's top scorer). The next season the club again won the Copa Libertadores, defeating Cobreloa of Chile 1–0 on a goal from Fernando Morena (the tournament's top scorer with seven goals) in the game's final minutes. Later that year the club won the Uruguayan championship and its third Intercontinental Cup, defeating Aston Villa 2–0. \n\nDespite financial problems during the 1980s, Peñarol won the national championship in 1985 and 1986 , and a fifth Copa Libertadores in 1987 . The club defeated América de Cali 1–0 with a goal by Diego Aguirre in the final seconds of extra time, when a tie would have gone to the Colombians on the goal differential. It was the third Copa Libertadores won by Peñarol at the Nacional de Chile , following victories in 1966 and 1982 . [ citation needed ]\n\nPeñarol celebrated its hundredth anniversary in 1991, despite a controversy ignited by archrivals Nacional concerning Peñarol's 1913 name change. With Pablo Bengoechea and the young Antonio Pacheco on the team and Gregorio Pérez behind the bench, Peñarol again won the Uruguayan championship five straight times ( 1993 – 97 ). The club also reached the Copa Conmebol final in 1994 and 1995, rounding out the century with a national championship in 1999 (defeating Nacional 2–1 in the final, despite Julio Ribas on the bench). [ citation needed ]\n\nThe next year, Peñarol lost the Uruguayan championship final against Nacional; many of the team's players were jailed after a tournament fight. Peñarol won the national championship again in 2003 for Diego Aguirre , defeating Nacional in the final. The club did not win another national title until the 2009–10 season , when it won the Clausura tournament with 14 victories in 15 games (12 of them in a row). In the Clausura final, Peñarol defeated Nacional 2–1. The championship qualified the team for the Libertadores 2011 , where Peñarol reached the final with Santos . \n\nThe club was congratulated on its 120th anniversary in September 2011 by presidents Joseph Blatter , Michel Platini , and Nicolás Leoz . \n\nThroughout the club's history minor changes have been made to its symbols, but it has kept its original colors. The shield and flag were designed by architect Constante Facello and consist of five black stripes, four yellow stripes and eleven yellow stars on a black background (representing the eleven players). \n\nSince its founding, Peñarol's colors have been yellow and black. They were inspired by the Rocket locomotive designed by George Stephenson , which won an award in 1829. \n\nThe first jersey was a plain shirt, divided into four square sections which alternated black and yellow. A variant had two vertical halves (black on the right and black-and-yellow stripes on the left), with black shorts and socks. Peñarol's official jersey (black and yellow stripes) dates back to 1911 and has been worn almost continuously, with only slight variations. \n\nPeñarol inspired Romanian club FC Brașov to change its official colors in December 1966 from white and blue to yellow and black. The change came following a tournament of Romania's Olympic football team in Uruguay. After a match with Peñarol, Csaba Györffy , player at FC Brașov , received from Peñarol's captain Alberto Spencer the shirt with which he played. Györffy was fascinated by the combination of yellow and black stripes and decided at the return in the country to wear the shirt during his training sessions with the team. The decision to change the colors of the club was taken by coach Silviu Ploeşteanu , who considered that, in the new colors, the team will be seen better on the field. Since January 1967, the team from Brașov has yellow-black as official colors, recalling Peñarol. \n\nPeñarol's first stadium was the José Pedro Damiani, also known as Las Acacias . It was bought in 1913 and inaugurated on 19 April 1916 with a 3–1 victory over Nacional. The stadium's gate was that of the former Estadio Pocitos , Peñarol's first stadium where the first goal in the history of the FIFA World Cup was scored in 1930 . \n\nThe stadium is in the Marconi neighbourhood of Montevideo. Its pitch is of 37,949 square metres (408,480 sq ft), and it has a capacity of 12,000. Because Peñarol was not allowed to play there due to security concerns, the club home ground was the city owned Estadio Centenario. Opened on 18 July 1930, the Centenario stadium is in Parque Batlle and can hold 65,235. \n\nLas Acacias has acted as the home ground for all Peñarol's Youth Teams.\n\nOn 28 September 2012, the club proposed a 40,000-capacity stadium in the outskirts of Montevideo, about 7 kilometres (4.3 mi) from the Aeropuerto Internacional de Carrasco . The name of their newest stadium is Campeón del Siglo (CDS), opening in March 2016 and which has been the home ground ever since.\n\nThe Palacio Peñarol , in downtown Montevideo, is the club's headquarters and basketball stadium. It was opened on 21 June 1955; and is located. The Palacio has 3,896 square metres (41,940 sq ft) in addition to basketball, it is home the club's museum and offices. After the October 2010 collapse of the Cilindro Municipal , the Palacio Peñarol became an important venue for Uruguayan basketball. \n\nThe Complejo Deportivo Washington Cataldi, commonly known as Los Aromos, is a training ground for the main team. In Villa Los Aromos of Barros Blancos, in the Canelones department , Los Aromos was bought in 1945; under the direction of architect José Donato, it was built in two years. \n\nFor the club's 118th anniversary, the Centro de Alto Rendimiento was inaugurated. The new facility, which opened on 28 September 2009, includes five football pitches, a weight room and a gymnasium with artificial turf. \n\nThe Frank Henderson School, named in honor of the club's first president, is a few kilometers away from the Centro de Alto Rendimiento. It was built to develop the club's young players, and houses those who come from other areas. \n\nIn Uruguayan football, loyalty to Peñarol or Nacional divides the country. The clubs are evenly matched, and have a large fan base. Many surveys of public opinion have been conducted, but none have been conclusive. In 1993 the Factum consulting firm reported that Peñarol was the favorite team of 41 percent of football fans, while 38 percent supported Nacional. Factum conducted another survey in 2006, confirming its previous results: Peñarol with 45 percent and Nacional with 35 percent. \n\nMPC Consultants surveyed 9,000 Uruguayans; Peñarol had 45 percent of the supporters, and Nacional 38 percent. An online survey on the webpage Sportsvs.com showed Nacional with 50.35 percent and Peñarol with 49.45 percent. \n\nSince its formation, Peñarol's barra brava has been involved in violence against other clubs and the Uruguayan police. Incidents provoked by these fans have cost Peñarol 31 points since 1994; the penalties cost the team three tournaments ( Apertura 1994 , Clausura 1997 and Clausura 2002 ). \n\nIn 2010 the club attempted to increase its fan base to improve its sustainability. During Clausura 2010 promotions were offered, marketing managers hired and the peñas (local fan clubs) encouraged. The campaign was successful; in February 2013 the club had over 62,000 members, the largest fan club in Uruguay. \n\nThe Uruguayan Derby between Peñarol and Nacional goes back to 1900, the oldest football rivalry outside the British Islands . The first game ever played between Nacional and CURCC was on 15 July 1900 and ended 2–0 in favor of CURCC. CURCC was ahead at first, but Nacional caught up during the late 1910s. Nacional took the lead by fourteen games in 1948, and would not surrender it until the late 1970s (except briefly in 1968). Since then, Peñarol has been the leader; its longest lead was 26 games in January 2004. Including the amateur and professional eras, league and friendly games, the teams have met 511 times in the past with 182 victories to Peñarol, 166 to Nacional and 163 ties. \n\nA notable game for Peñarol fans is occurred on 9 October 1949 in the Uruguayan Cup first round, and is known as the Clásico de la fuga (the \"escape derby\"). At the end of the first half Peñarol was leading 2–0, but at halftime Nacional decided not to return. While Peñarol fans believe that Nacional did not want to be defeated by a Peñarol team known as the Máquina del 49 (\"Machine of 49\"), Nacional supporters claim it was a protest against poor officiating. \n\nOn 23 April 1987 for a friendly game, Peñarol and Nacional were tied 1–1 with 22 minutes remaining when three Peñarol players ( José Perdomo , José Herrera and Ricardo Viera ) were ejected after a foul and subsequent protests. Peñarol then had to face a full Nacional team with only eight players on the pitch. With eight minutes remaining Diego Aguirre set up Jorge Cabrera , who scored the winning goal. This win by the aurinegro was known as the Clásico de los 8 contra 11 (the \"8 against 11 derby\"). \n\nPeñarol and Nacional have faced each other in the final game of the Uruguayan Championship thirteen times, with Peñarol winning eight. The most recent was in 2018, when Peñarol won the championship 2–1. \n\nIn early October 2011 Manyas: The Movie , a documentary about Peñarol's fans, was released in Uruguay. Produced by Kafka Films and Sacromonte and directed by Andrés Benvenuto , the film features interviews with fans, football journalists, psychologists and politicians. Manyas: The Movie was deemed of cultural interest by the Culture and Education Ministry of Uruguay and of ministerial interest by Uruguay's Ministry of Tourism and Sport. The film had the most-successful premiere of any Uruguayan film, selling 13,000 tickets during its first weekend and 30,000 over its first fifteen days. \n\nAfter raising $35,000 in raffles and donations, on 12 April 2011 Peñarol fans unveiled the largest flag ever unfurled in a stadium up to that moment. Nacional unfurled a bigger one years later that covered three stands of the stadium. The flag, 309 metres (1,014 ft) long and 46 metres (151 ft) wide for a surface area of 14,124 square metres (152,030 sq ft), covered one-and-a-half grandstands in Centenario Stadium. In 2013, Club Nacional de Football displayed a flag which was 600 metres long by 50 metres wide. This is now the world's biggest flag.\n\nNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules ; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.\n\nNote: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules ; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.\n\nNéstor Gonçalves has the most official games in the club's history (571 matches), between 28 April 1957 and 28 November 1970. The team's all-time top scorers in the Primera División are Fernando Morena (203), Alberto Spencer (113) and Óscar Míguez (107). Morena's (whose 230 goals—203 with Peñarol and 27 with River Plate —make him the highest-scoring player in the Uruguayan League) 440 goals with Peñarol are a record as well. He scored the most goals in a single Uruguayan season (36 in 1978 ), and is the club's second-best goal scorer in international competition with 37 goals (behind Alberto Spencer , who scored 58 goals between 1960 and 1970). Spencer and Morena are the top scorers in Copa Libertadores history, with 48 and 37 goals respectively for Peñarol. [ note 2 ]\n\nPeñarol has made a large contribution to the Uruguay national football team . Three Peñarol players were on the Uruguayan team which played Argentina in 1905. Five Peñarol players were on the Uruguayan squad which won the 1930 FIFA World Cup : goalkeeper Miguel Capuccini , defender Peregrino Anselmo and midfielders Lorenzo Fernández , Álvaro Gestido and Carlos Riolfo . Peñarol had nine players on the Uruguayan squad which won the 1950 FIFA World Cup : goalkeeper Roque Máspoli , defenders Juan Carlos González and Washington Ortuño , midfielders Juan Alberto Schiaffino and Obdulio Varela and forwards Ernesto Vidal , Julio César Britos , Óscar Míguez and Alcides Ghiggia . Schiaffino and Ghiggia scored the team's two goals in the Maracanazo , the final game against Brazil. Peñarol is the only club which has represented Uruguay in all its World Cup appearances. \n\nWhile there is no hard information about managers in the amateur era of Uruguayan football, Peñarol has had a total of 62 coaches during its professional era. The first manager was Leonardo de Luca , who coached the team for two years and won the Uruguayan Championship (the first professional tournament in Uruguay) in 1932.\n\nOf these 62 managers, 53 were Uruguayan; two were Hungarian ( Emérico Hirschl and Béla Guttmann ), two British ( John Harley and Randolph Galloway ), one Serbian ( Ljupko Petrović ), two Brazilian ( Osvaldo Brandão and Dino Sani ), one from Chile ( Mario Tuane ) and two from Argentina ( Jorge Kistenmacher and César Luis Menotti ).\n\nHugo Bagnulo and Gregorio Pérez have coached Peñarol the longest, leading the first team for eight seasons: Bagnulo for four stints and Pérez for five. Athuel Velásquez had the longest uninterrupted coaching period for Peñarol (five straight years, between 1935 and 1940). Bagnulo has the most Uruguayan championships (five); Pérez and Velásquez follow, with four each. In international competition Roberto Scarone was the most successful manager, winning two Copa Libertadores and an Intercontinental Cup with Peñarol. \n\nCaretaker managers in italics\n\nDuring a meeting presided over by Roland Moor on 28 September 1891, it was stipulated that responsibility for the Central Uruguay Railway Cricket Club would belong to the principal administrator of the Central Uruguay Railway Company of Montevideo. The first president of the club was Frank Henderson, who remained in that office until 1899. \n\nAfter Henderson CUR administrators remained as chairmen of the sports club until 1906, when Charles W. Bayne took over the CUR. Bayne refused to sponsor the CURCC because of vandalism by fans and absenteeism by workers. He was replaced by CUR employee Roland Moor. \n\nConflicts remained between the company and the sports club, which resulted in the separation of CURCC's football section from the company and a name change to Club Atlético Peñarol. Jorge Clulow, an Englishman with Uruguayan nationality, was chosen chairman of the club; he remained in office from 1914 to 1915. \n\nHonorary\n\nPeñarol played 26 seasons of the Uruguay Association Football League, from its creation in 1900 until the end of the amateur era in 1931 (absent 1923–26, when the club was disaffiliated from the AUF). During this period Peñarol won the Uruguayan Championship nine times, with its best years in 1900 and 1905 (when the club won the championship without conceding any points). Peñarol was undefeated in 1901 , 1903 and 1907 . [ note 4 ] Its worst year was 1908; the team left the league after ten games, forfeiting the other eight. Peñarol's largest goal difference in a game during its amateur era was in 1903, when they defeated Triunfo 12–0. \n\nThe club placed second in 1923 (when they scored a record 100 goals), and won in 1924 ; its most impressive victory was a 10–0 win over Roberto Cherry during the cancelled 1925 season. Both tournaments were organised by dissident body Uruguayan Football Federation (FUF).\n\nSince the beginning of the professional era in 1932 , Peñarol and Nacional are the only teams who have played every season for the Uruguayan championship. [ note 5 ] Peñarol has the most Uruguayan League titles (winning 38 times between 1932 and 2013 ) and the greatest number of undefeated championships ( 1949 , 1954 , 1964 , 1967 , 1968 , 1975 and 1978 ). Its best performances were in 1949 and 1964 , seasons when the team scored 94.44 percent of possible points; its worst season was 2005–06 , when it finished in 16th place after winning 32.32 percent of possible points. A 12-point deduction given the team by the AUF because of unrest after a game with Cerro relegated them to that position. \n\nPeñarol's best victory was a 9–0 win against Rampla Juniors in 1962; its worst defeat was 0–6 against Nacional. On the international scene, its best result was an 11–2 win over Valencia of Venezuela on 15 March 1970; its worst was against Olimpia of Paraguay , a 0–6 loss on 10 December 1990 during the Supercopa Sudamericana .\n\nPeñarol holds a number of national and international records. The club has the longest undefeated run in the Uruguayan league: 56 games, from 3 September 1966 to 14 September 1968. This is also the longest undefeated run in South American professional football (second place if amateur leagues are counted). \n\nIt was the first club to win the Copa Libertadores de América undefeated, in 1960 . Peñarol has the greatest number of appearances in the Copa Libertadores (40), and the second most appearances in the finals (10) after Boca Juniors. The club holds the record for the biggest win (11–2 against Valencia), and the biggest goal difference in a two-legged elimination (defeating Everest from Ecuador 5–0 and 9–1). Peñarol is one of the teams with five Intercontinental Cup appearances, the first to reach that number.\n\n(Cups)\n\nIn 2009, the International Federation of Football History & Statistics released a list of the best clubs of the 20th century on each continent. The organization awarded points for each victory in a quarterfinal or higher in international competition but only took into account games played after 1932 for the Professional era. Peñarol was the number-one team in South America, above Independiente of Argentina and arch-rivals Nacional. [ citation needed ]\n\nPeñarol's basketball records date back to the late 1920s, when Club Piratas was formed; in 1931, it became Peñarol. Its first league game (in the fourth division of Uruguayan basketball) was played in 1940. By 1943 the team, playing in the first division for Ramón Esnal, finished third. The following year Peñarol won the Federal Championship , a tournament attracting the best basketball teams in Montevideo; in 2003, the league changed its name to Liga Uruguaya de Basketball .\n\nIn 1945, Peñarol jumped from the Uruguayan Basketball Federation to play in a new league; when the upstart league failed, the club rejoined the federation in 1947. In 1952 Peñarol again won the Federal Championship, winning the Winter Tournament in 1953 and 1955. After a low period (with relegation in 1968), Peñarol won the Uruguayan Championship in 1973, 1978, and 1979;the latter was the first professional tournament in league history. In 1982 the club enjoyed its most successful season, winning the Federal Championship and the Winter Tournament The club also won the Campeonato Sudamericano de Clubes in 1983. In 1985 the club was relegated, beginning a downward spiral which ended with its expulsion from the league in 1997. However, the club rejoined in 2018 the Federación Uruguaya de Basket Ball, in the third tier. \n\nPeñarol has participated in the Vuelta Ciclista del Uruguay (Tour of Uruguay) since it began in 1939. Although the team rode well during its early years, it was not until the ninth edition (in 1952) that a Peñarol cyclist would win the race (Dante Sudatti, with an overall time of 48 hours, 38 minutes and 38 seconds). Peñarol cyclists also won the general classification 1953 and 1956; in the latter year, the club won the team championship.\n\nAfter again winning the team championship in 1959, Peñarol would only win one individual championship in 1964. The team later improved, winning three individual titles in a row from 1989 to 1991 and the team victory in 1990 and 1991. 2002 was the fourth year that the club won both the individual and team classifications. Peñarol has competed in other road races, including José María Orlando's 1990 victory in the Rutas de América . \n\nPeñarol began playing futsal in 1968. During its first two decades, the club won on the national and international levels (including a victory in the 1987 World Interclub Championship). In 1995 FIFA took over the sport, and Peñarol began competing in AUF tournaments. The team won the first three Uruguayan Championships (1995, 1996, and 1997), also finishing at the top in 1999 and 2004. It won another three consecutive tournaments in 2010, 2011 and 2012. \n\nIn January 2013 Peñarol inaugurated its beach soccer section. Diego Monserrat, goalkeeper of the Uruguay national team for many years, was the institution's first coach in this sport, while also goalkeeper Felipe Fernández was the club's first captain. In the second half of the same month, Peñarol won one of the three groups of five teams, that formed the qualification tournament to the \"Super Liga\", name given to the Uruguayan Championship of the discipline. After victories on quarterfinals and semi-finals, Peñarol was declared champion of the tournament without the need of a final, after the other semi-final was suspended. \n\nPeñarol have announced that they will form a rugby union section to compete in the inaugural 2020 season of the Superliga Americana de Rugby , to be start in February 2020. Peñarol Rugby will be the only representative of Uruguay at the competition. \n\nPeñarol Rugby was the Champion of the 2022 Súper Liga Americana de Rugby season .\n\nPeñarol also has an esports division, with squads competing in League of Legends and FIFA leagues organized by the Uruguayan Virtual Football Association. ",
  "The Communications Security Establishment ( CSE ; French : Centre de la sécurité des télécommunications , CST ), formerly (from 2008-2014) called the Communications Security Establishment Canada ( CSEC ), is the Government of Canada 's national cryptologic agency. It is responsible for foreign signals intelligence (SIGINT) and communications security (COMSEC), protecting federal government electronic information and communication networks , and is the technical authority for cyber security and information assurance . \n\nFormally administered under the Department of National Defence (DND), the CSE is now a separate agency under the National Defence portfolio. The CSE is accountable to the Minister of National Defence through its deputy head, the Chief of CSE. The National Defence Minister is in turn accountable to the Cabinet and Parliament . The current Chief of the CSE is Caroline Xavier , who assumed the office on 31 August 2022. \n\nIn 2015, the agency built a new headquarters and campus encompassing 340,000 m 2 (84 acres). The facility totals a little over 110,000 m 2 (1,200,000 sq ft) and is adjacent to CSIS .\n\nCSE originates from Canada's joint military and civilian code-breaking and intelligence efforts during the Second World War . \n\nThe Examination Unit ( XU ) was established during the Second World War , in June 1941, as a branch of the National Research Council . It was the first civilian office in Canada solely dedicated to decryption of communications signals; until then, SIGINT was entirely within the purview of the Canadian military , and mostly limited to intercepts . \n\nIn March 1942, XU moved next door to Laurier House in Sandy Hill, Ottawa ; this location was chosen because they felt it would draw no suspicion to the enemies. In September, the Department of External Affairs established its Special Intelligence Section at XU with the purpose of reviewing decoded SIGINT with other collateral information to produce intelligence summaries . \n\nThe original mandate of the Examination Unit was to intercept the communications of Vichy France and Germany . Its mandate later expanded to include interception and decryption of Japanese communications after Japan entered the war . The unit was estimated to have had 50 staff members at any one time. In total 77 people worked there. \n\nBy 1945, the disparate SIGINT collection units of the Canadian Navy , Army , and Air Force , were consolidated into the Joint Discrimination Unit (JDU), which was headquartered in Ottawa in the same building as the XU. By the end of the War, the military JDU and the civilian XU were able to coordinate SIGINT collection, analysis, and dissemination so efficiently that it led officials to consider the establishment of peacetime SIGINT operations. In September 1945, U.S. President Harry Truman declared it would be vital to carry out such operations, and Canadian authorities came to the same conclusion in December later that year. \n\nOn 13 April 1946, a secret Order in Council allowed for postwar continuation of wartime cryptologic efforts and thus the Communications Branch of the National Research Council of Canada (CBNRC) was founded. This agency would be the predecessor to today's Communications Security Establishment (CSE). \n\nBeginning operations on 3 September 1946, the Communications Branch of the National Research Council (CBNRC) was the first peace-time cryptologic agency and was kept secret for much of its beginning. The CBNRC was established through a secret Order in Council signed on 13 April 1946, combining the civilian Examination Unit (XU) and the military Joint Discrimination Unit (JDU) and was located at LaSalle Academy . \n\nWith Edward Drake as its first director, the agency worked with intercepted foreign electronic communications , collected largely from the Royal Canadian Signal Corps (RCCS) station at Rockcliffe Airport in Ottawa. CSE also worked with Canadian Forces Station Leitrim (CFS Leitrim; formerly 1 Special Wireless Station till 1949, and Ottawa Wireless Station till 1966), Canada's oldest operational signal intelligence (SIGINT) collection station, established by the RCCS in 1941 and located just south of Ottawa. In 1946, the station's complement was 75 personnel (compared to its around 2,000 employees in 2013–2014). This unit successfully decrypted , translated, and analyzed these foreign signals, and turned that raw information into useful intelligence reports during the course of the war.\n\nCBNRC finally began domestic COMSEC efforts on 1 January 1947. During the Cold War , the CBNRC was primarily responsible for providing SIGINT data to the Department of National Defence regarding the military operations of the Soviet Union . \n\nIn February 1950, R. S. McLaren was appointed the first CBNRC Senior Liaison Officer (CBSLO) to Washington, D.C. In March 1962: CBNRC installed its first IBM supercomputer , costing CA$372k. In December 1964, CBNRC began collaboration on \"Canadian ALVIS\" (CID 610), the first and only Canadian cipher machine to be mass-produced; based on the British ALVIS ( BID 610 ). \n\nCBNRC and the information it gathered and shared was kept secret for 34 years until 9 January 1974, when CBC Television aired a documentary titled The Fifth Estate: The Espionage Establishment . This was the first time that the organization had ever been mentioned in public. This resulted in an outcry in the House of Common and an admission by the Canadian government that the organization existed. \n\nIn 1975, the CBNRC was transferred to the Department of National Defence (DND) by an Order in Council , and became the Communications Security Establishment. CSE was now publicly known, and had diversified since the Cold War becoming the primary SIGINT resource in Canada.\n\nIn 1988, CSE created the Canadian System Security Centre to establish a Canadian computer security standard among other goals. This led to the publication of the Canadian Trusted Computer Product Evaluation Criteria . \n\nFollowing the September 11 attacks in 2001, Canada's Anti-terrorism Act ( ATA ) was ratified, receiving royal assent on 18 December 2001. It amended the National Defence Act to formally acknowledge and mandate the activities of CSE. It also made amendments to the Canadian Security Intelligence Service Act , the Criminal Code , and the Official Secrets Act (later the Security of Information Act ). \n\nIn early 2008, in line with the Federal Identity Program (FIP) of the Government of Canada, which requires all federal agencies to have the word Canada in their name, CSE adopted the applied title Communications Security Establishment Canada (CSEC; French : Centre de la sécurité des télécommunications Canada , CSTC). Since mid-2014, the organization has used its legal name (Communications Security Establishment) and initials (CSE) on its website and in public statements.\n\nIn November 2011, CSE was made an independent agency, though still operating under the National Defence portfolio and constrained by the National Defence Act . \n\nIn June 2019, the Communications Security Establishment Act was passed as part of an omnibus national security bill called the National Security Act 2017 . Coming into force two months later, in August, the act set out the mandate and powers of CSE. As part of the omnibus bill, oversight of CSE activities was assumed by the newly created National Security and Intelligence Review Agency (NSIRA). \n\nOn October 11, 2023, CSE Chief Caroline Xavier said in an interview with CBC News that CSE offices in various cities may be opened to alleviate staffing shortages. \n\nCSE uses generic identifiers imposed by the Federal Identity Program . However, CSE is one of several federal departments and agencies (primarily those having law enforcement, security or regulatory functions) that have been granted a badge by the Canadian Heraldic Authority . The badge was granted in 1994, while CSE's pennant was first raised in 1996 to mark the organization's 50th anniversary.\n\nFrom the 1990s to the mid 2000s, CSE's Information Technology Security program used a logo to identify its products and publications. The triangle represented threats, while the arc symbolized protection. \n\nUnique within Canada's security and intelligence community, the Communications Security Establishment employs code-makers and code-breakers ( cryptanalysis ) to provide the Government of Canada with information technology security (IT Security) and foreign signals intelligence services. CSE also provides technical and operational assistance to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and federal law enforcement and security agencies, including the Canada Border Services Agency and the Canadian Air Transport Security Authority .\n\nCSE relies on its closest foreign intelligence allies, the US, UK, Australia and New Zealand to share the collection burden and the resulting intelligence yield. Canada is a substantial beneficiary and participant of the collaborative effort within the partnership to collect and report on foreign communications. \n\nDuring the Cold War , CSE's primary client for signals intelligence was National Defence, and its focus was the military operations of the then Soviet Union . Since the end of the Cold War, Government of Canada requirements have evolved to include a wide variety of political, defence, and security issues of interest to a much broader range of client departments.\n\nWhile these continue to be key intelligence priorities for Government of Canada decision-makers, increasing focus on protecting the safety of Canadians is prompting greater interest in intelligence on transnational issues, including terrorism .\n\nCSE code breaking capabilities degraded substantially in the 1960s and 1970s but were upgraded with the acquisition of a Cray X-MP/11 (modified) supercomputer delivered to the Sir Leonard Tilley building in March 1985 and the hiring of code breaking analysts. It was, at the time, the most powerful computer in Canada. In the early 1990s, the Establishment purchased a Floating Point Systems FPS 522-EA supercomputer at a cost of $1,620,371. This machine was upgraded to a Cray S-MP superserver after Cray acquired Floating Point Systems in December 1991 and used the Folklore Operating System supplied by the NSA in the US. These machines are now retired.\n\nLittle information is available on the types of computers used by the CSE since then. However, Cray in the US has produced a number of improved supercomputers since then. These include the Cray SX-6, early 2000s, the Cray X1 , 2003 (development funded in part by the NSA), Cray XD1 , 2004, Cray XT3, Cray XT4 , 2006, Cray XMt, 2006 and Cray CX1, 2008. It is possible that some of these models have been used by the CSE and are in use today.\n\nThe Canadian Centre for Cyber Security ( CCCS or Cyber Centre ; French : Centre Canadien pour la Cyber Sécurité ) is the Government of Canada authority responsible for monitoring threats , protecting national critical infrastructure against cyber incidents, and coordinating the national response to any incidents related to cyber security .\n\nAs a unit under the Communications Security Establishment (CSE), the agency is Canada's computer emergency response team (CSIRT) and the Canadian government's computer Incident response team (CIRT). \n\nOfficially created on 1 October 2018, CCCS consolidated the existing operational cyber-security units of several federal government organizations, including Public Safety Canada 's Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre, Shared Services Canada 's Security Operations Centre, and the CSE's Information Technology Security branch. \n\nFormerly known as communications security (COMSEC), the CSE's Information Technology Security branch grew out of a need to protect sensitive information transmitted by various agencies of the government, especially the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade (DFAIT), Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA), DND, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP). \n\nThe Cyber Centre was developed in response to CSE's consultations with Canadians in 2016 which identified various issues pertaining to cyber security in relation to the federal government, including accountability, departmental coordination, and leadership. In February 2018, the federal budget allocated funds for CSE, in collaboration with Public Safety Canada and Shared Services Canada , to launch the Cyber Centre. \n\nOfficially created on 1 October 2018, CCCS consolidated the existing operational cyber-security units of several federal government organizations, including the Canadian Cyber Incident Response Centre of Public Safety Canada; the Security Operations Centre of Shared Services Canada; and the Information Technology Security branch of CSE. \n\nPrior to opening, in June 2018, Minister Ralph Goodale appointed Scott Jones the head of the new Centre. \n\nThe Tutte Institute for Mathematics and Computing ( TIMC ) is a research institute programme of the Government of Canada responsible for conducting classified research in the areas of cryptology and knowledge discovery to support the Canadian Cryptologic Program and its Five-Eyes international partners. \n\nThough officially founded in 2009, TIMC officially opened and formally named in September 2011. Named after cryptanalyst and mathematician William T. Tutte , TIMC is based within CSE's Edward Drake Building in Ottawa . \n\nSponsored and funded by the Communications Security Establishment, the institute is partnered with Institutes for Defence Analyses , CCR Princeton, CCR La Jolla, CCS Bowie, the Heilbronn Institute for Mathematical Research , Carleton University , and the University of Calgary and is working to create partnerships with other research institutes, government agencies and universities. \n\nResearchers Leland McInnes and John Healy at the Tutte Institute developed a technique called Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP), originally designed to analyze malware . The algorithm and software of UMAP has since been released by TIMC to the open-source community , and is now being used to answer questions about COVID-19 . \n\nCSE occupies several buildings in Ottawa , including the Edward Drake Building and, formerly, the Sir Leonard Tilley Building .\n\nCSE moved to the Tilley Building in June 1961. On 26 February 2015, CSE officially inaugurated their headquarters at the new Edward Drake Building, named for Lt. Colonel Edward Drake, a pioneer of the Canadian signals intelligence . \n\nWith the rapid expansion in the number of CSE personnel since the 9/11 attack in the US, the CSE has built new facilities. A new CA$ 1.2 billion facility, encompassing 72,000 square metres (18 acres), has been built in the eastern part of Ottawa, immediately west of the headquarters building for the Canadian Security Intelligence Service . Construction began in early 2011 and was completed in 2015. \n\nIn addition to those mentioned below, CSE is bound by all other Canadian laws, including the Criminal Code , the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms , the Privacy Act , Security of Information Act , and the Avoiding Complicity in Mistreatment by Foreign Entities Act . \n\nIn December 2001, the Canadian government passed omnibus bill C-36 into law as the Anti-Terrorism Act . The Act amended portions of the National Defence Act and officially recognized CSE's three-part mandate:\n\nThe Anti-Terrorism Act also strengthened CSE's capacity to engage in the war on terrorism by providing needed authorities to fulfill its mandate.\n\nIn the 2007 Proceedings of the Canadian Senate Standing Committee on National Security and Defence , then-CSE Chief John Adams indicated that the CSE is collecting communications data when he suggested that the legislation was not perfect in regard to interception of information relating to the \"envelope.\" \n\nIn June 2019, the Communications Security Establishment Act ( CSE Act ) was passed, as part of the National Security Act 2017 . The Act, which came into force two months after passing, notes that there are five aspects of CSE's mandate: \n\nThe CSE Act requires that CSE activities do not target Canadians anywhere in the world, or any person in Canada, \"unless there are reasons to believe that there is an imminent danger of death or serious bodily harm. The Act also requires the CSE protect the privacy of Canadians and persons in Canada. As such, CSE is forbidden, by law, to intercept domestic communications. When intercepting communications between a domestic and foreign source, the domestic communications are destroyed or otherwise ignored. (After the September 11 attacks on the United States in 2001, however, CSE's powers expanded to allow the interception of foreign communications that begin or end in Canada, as long as the other party is outside the border and ministerial authorization is issued specifically for this case and purpose.) \n\nThe Minister of National Defence guides and authorizes the activities of CSE using ministerial directives, ministerial authorizations, and ministerial orders , all of which are based on the \"government’s intelligence priorities as set out by Cabinet through discussion and consultations with the security and intelligence community.\" The Defence Minister cannot authorize any activities that are not included in the CSE mandate or grant CSE any powers that do not exist in Canadian law. \n\nMinisterial directives are how the Minister of National Defence instructs the Chief of CSE. \n\nCSE operates under a system of independent oversight: \n\nCSE activities are also subject to several external oversight and review bodies. \n\nAs with any other federal department or agency of Canada, the activities of CSE are also subject to review by various federal bodies, including: \n\nOversight over CSE was formerly provided by the Office of the Communications Security Establishment Commissioner ( OCSEC ; French : Bureau du commissaire du Centre de la sécurité des télécommunications , BCCST), which was created on 19 June 1996 to review CSE's activities for compliance with the applicable legislation, accept and investigate complaints regarding the lawfulness of the agency's activities, and to perform special duties under the ' Public Interest Defence ' clause of the Security of Information Act . The Commissioner provided an annual public report on his activities and findings to Parliament, through the Minister of National Defence. \n\nBetween 1996 and 2019, there were six Commissioners: \n\nAs part of an omnibus national security bill (the National Security Act 2017 ) passed by Parliament in 2019, the OCSEC was abolished and its responsibilities divided between two newly created entities: employees of the OCSEC were transferred to the Office of the Intelligence Commissioner ; and the review functions of the former OCSEC were assumed by the National Security and Intelligence Review Agency (NSIRA). \n\nThe previous Commissioner of CSE, Jean-Pierre Plouffe, was appointed to the role of Intelligence Commissioner on 18 July 2019. \n\nUnder the 1948 UKUSA agreement, CSE's intelligence is shared with the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA), the British Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), the Australian Signals Directorate (ASD), and New Zealand 's Government Communications Security Bureau (GCSB). \n\nAlong with these services from the United States, the UK, New Zealand, and Australia, CSE is believed to form the ECHELON system. Its capabilities are suspected to include the ability to monitor a large proportion of the world's transmitted civilian telephone, fax and data traffic. The intercepted data, or \"dictionaries\" are \"reported linked together through a high-powered array of computers known as 'Platform'.\" \n\nCBNRC and the information it gathered and shared was kept secret for 34 years until 9 January 1974, when the CBC Television documentary show, The Fifth Estate , aired an episode focused on the organization, with research by James Dubro . This was the first time that the organization had ever been mentioned in public. This resulted in an outcry in the House of Commons and an admission by the Canadian government that the organization existed. \n\nA former employee of the organization, Mike Frost, claimed in a 1994 book, Spyworld , that the agency eavesdropped on Margaret Trudeau to find out if she smoked marijuana and that CSE had monitored two of former British prime minister Margaret Thatcher 's dissenting cabinet ministers in London on behalf of the UK's secret service. \n\nIn 1996, it was suggested that CSE had monitored all communications between National Defence Headquarters and Somalia, and were withholding information from the Somalia Inquiry into the killing of two unarmed Somalis by Canadian soldiers. \n\nIn 2006, CTV Montreal 's program On Your Side conducted a three-part documentary on CSE naming it \"Canada's most secretive spy agency\" and that \"this ultra-secret agency has now become very powerful,\" conducting surveillance by monitoring phone calls, e-mails, chat groups, radio, microwave, and satellite. \n\nIn 2007, former Ontario lieutenant-governor, James Bartleman , testified at the Air India Inquiry on May 3 that he saw a CSE communications intercept warning of the June 22, 1985 bombing of Air India Flight 182 before it occurred. Two former CSE employees have since testified that no CSE report was ever produced. \n\nIn 2013, a coalition of civil liberties associations launched a campaign directed against the government's perceived lack of transparency on issues related to the agency, demanding more information on its purported domestic surveillance activities. \n\nFurther criticism has arisen surrounding the construction costs of the agency's new headquarters in Ottawa . The project is slated to cost over CA$ 1.1 billion, making it the most expensive government building in Canadian history. \n\nIn 2014, a leaked, top-secret presentation entitled “IP Profiling Analytics & Mission Impacts” summarized experiments tracking the cellphones of travellers passing through Toronto Pearson International Airport . Critics argued that the experiment was invasive and indiscriminate, while CSE countered that it was consistent with all relevant laws and mandates.\n\nIn 2016, the CSE Commissioner found that one of the agency's metadata activities did not comply with the law. Specifically, CSE had failed to properly minimize certain Canadian identity information before sending it to foreign governments, contravening parts of the National Defence Act and the Privacy Act . \n\nIn The Good Wife episode \" Landing ,\" both the NSA and the CSE are shown monitoring personal phone calls and hacking private cell phones' recording devices in order to listen in on personal conversations. One plaintiff describes the CSE as \"the Canadian version of the NSA.\"\n\n45°26′02″N 75°36′58″W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.434°N 75.616°W ﻿ / 45.434; -75.616",
  "The Bookspot Literatuurprijs (previously ECI Literatuurprijs , AKO Literatuurprijs and Generale Bank Literatuurprijs ) is a prize for literature in the Netherlands and Belgium . It is awarded to authors writing in Dutch and amounts to € 50,000. The ceremony is televised live each year. The prize was conceived in 1986 and inaugurated the following year with the aim to promote literature and increase the public's interest in books.\n\nThe name of the prize has not been constant, reflecting the main sponsors. It was first prefixed with AKO after its sponsor-founder, the Amsterdamsche Kiosk Onderneming, a chain of over 100 bookstores and newsstands in the Netherlands. From 1997 through 1999 it was sponsored by Belgium's Generale Bank and was named accordingly – Generale Bank Literatuurprijs . The bank was absorbed and the sponsorship presumably assumed by Fortis Bank in 1999, but the financing of the prize reverted to AKO before the 2000 award, so the name Fortis Literatuurprijs was never formally implemented. Beginning in 2015, AKO dropped sponsorship and the prize was sponsored by ECI, a book club and webshop. ECI changed its name in March 2018 to Bookspot, so the literary award had to change as well.\n\nThe Bookspot Literatuurprijs is awarded by a five-member jury of Dutch and Belgian book critics, some of whom have served on it repeatedly. The sixth person, the head of the jury, changes every year and is usually a public figure, often a politician.\n\nThe nominations follow the system of a longlist, tiplijst , of 25 preliminary nominees and a shortlist, toplijst , of six finalists. In order to be considered for a given year, a book needs to be published before the first of July of the year in which the prize is to be awarded and after 30 June of the preceding year. The winner is usually announced later in the fall.\n\nThe Bookspot award comprehends the categories fiction and non-fiction. Additionally to the jury steered Bookspot Literatuurprijs (50.000 Euro) there is a separate BookSpot Lezersprijs which enables the readers' vote and grants 10.000 Euro to the winner. The process is well-elaborated: thirty books are selected by the general jury, two longlists of 15 books in fiction and non-fiction categories, published online annually any 4 September. Any reader can vote for his favorite books. The three most chosen books form the BookSpot Lezersprijs Top 3 . A separate BookSpot Lezersjury of fifty readers read those three books and elect the final Lezersprijs winner. ",
  "H.N. Jacobsens Bókahandil is the oldest bookshop in the Faroe Islands . It is also one of the oldest shops still in business in the Faroes today.\n\nThe bookshop was established on St. Olafs day on 29 July 1865 by bookbinder Hans Nicolai Jacobsen . He was the father of Jakob Jakobsen (1864-1918), who is one of the most important Faroese philologists .\n\nH. N. Jacobsen was one of the initiators of a public meeting in Tórshavn in 1888, aiming at public support for “the protection and preservation of the Faroese language and traditions ”, as the notice announcing the meeting said. This is considered as the official start of the Faroese National Movement.\n\nThe original book shop was in the old main street \"Gongin\", but 1918 it was moved to the Market Square \"Vaglið\", at the start of Niels Finsens gøta, where it still stands today.\n\nWith its characteristic Faroese grass roof and big maple trees in the foreground, it is a landmark in Tórshavn. In addition, a section of H.N. Jacobsens Bókahandil operates an antiquarian bookshop.\n\n62°00′37″N 6°46′20″W ﻿ / ﻿ 62.01028°N 6.77222°W ﻿ / 62.01028; -6.77222\n\nThis Faroe Islands article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Plankton are the diverse collection of organisms that drift in water (or air ) but are unable to actively propel themselves against currents (or wind ). The individual organisms constituting plankton are called plankters . In the ocean, they provide a crucial source of food to many small and large aquatic organisms, such as bivalves , fish , and baleen whales .\n\nMarine plankton include bacteria , archaea , algae , protozoa , microscopic fungi , and drifting or floating animals that inhabit the saltwater of oceans and the brackish waters of estuaries . Freshwater plankton are similar to marine plankton, but are found in lakes and rivers. Mostly, plankton just drift where currents take them, though some, like jellyfish , swim slowly but not fast enough to generally overcome the influence of currents.\n\nAlthough plankton are usually thought of as inhabiting water, there are also airborne versions that live part of their lives drifting in the atmosphere. These aeroplankton include plant spores , pollen and wind-scattered seeds . They may also include microorganisms swept into the air from terrestrial dust storms and oceanic plankton swept into the air by sea spray .\n\nThough many planktonic species are microscopic in size, plankton includes organisms over a wide range of sizes, including large organisms such as jellyfish. This is because plankton are defined by their ecological niche and level of motility rather than by any phylogenetic or taxonomic classification. The \"plankton\" category differentiates these organisms from those that float on the water's surface, called neuston , those that can swim against a current, called nekton , and those that live on the deep sea floor, called benthos .\n\nThe name plankton was coined by German marine biologist Victor Hensen in 1887 from shortening the word halyplankton from Greek ᾰ̔́λς háls \"sea\" and πλανάω planáō to \"drift\" or \"wander\". : 1 While some forms are capable of independent movement and can swim hundreds of meters vertically in a single day (a behavior called diel vertical migration ), their horizontal position is primarily determined by the surrounding water movement, and plankton typically flow with ocean currents . This is in contrast to nekton organisms, such as fish , squid and marine mammals , which can swim against the ambient flow and control their position in the environment.\n\nWithin the plankton, holoplankton spend their entire life cycle as plankton (e.g. most algae , copepods , salps , and some jellyfish ). By contrast, meroplankton are only planktic for part of their lives (usually the larval stage), and then graduate to either a nektic (swimming) or benthic (sea floor) existence. Examples of meroplankton include the larvae of sea urchins , starfish , crustaceans , marine worms , and most fish . \n\nThe amount and distribution of plankton depends on available nutrients, the state of water and a large amount of other plankton. \n\nThe study of plankton is termed planktology and a planktonic individual is referred to as a plankter. The adjective planktonic is widely used in both the scientific and popular literature, and is a generally accepted term. However, from the standpoint of prescriptive grammar, the less-commonly used planktic is more strictly the correct adjective. When deriving English words from their Greek or Latin roots, the gender-specific ending (in this case, \"-on\" which indicates the word is neuter) is normally dropped, using only the root of the word in the derivation. \n\nPlankton are primarily divided into broad functional (or trophic level ) groups:\n\nRecognition of the importance of mixotrophy as an ecological strategy is increasing, as well as the wider role this may play in marine biogeochemistry . Studies have shown that mixotrophs are much more important for marine ecology than previously assumed and comprise more than half of all microscopic plankton. Their presence acts as a buffer that prevents the collapse of ecosystems during times with little to no light. \n\nPlankton are also often described in terms of size. Usually the following divisions are used: \n\nHowever, some of these terms may be used with very different boundaries, especially on the larger end. The existence and importance of nano- and even smaller plankton was only discovered during the 1980s, but they are thought to make up the largest proportion of all plankton in number and diversity.\n\nThe microplankton and smaller groups are microorganisms and operate at low Reynolds numbers , where the viscosity of water is more important than its mass or inertia. \n\nMarine plankton includes marine bacteria and archaea , algae , protozoa and drifting or floating animals that inhabit the saltwater of oceans and the brackish waters of estuaries.\n\nFreshwater plankton are similar to marine plankton, but are found inland in the freshwaters of lakes and rivers.\n\nAeroplankton are tiny lifeforms that float and drift in the air, carried by the current of the wind ; they are the atmospheric analogue to oceanic plankton. Most of the living things that make up aeroplankton are very small to microscopic in size, and many can be difficult to identify because of their tiny size. Scientists can collect them for study in traps and sweep nets from aircraft , kites or balloons. Aeroplankton is made up of numerous microbes , including viruses , about 1000 different species of bacteria , around 40,000 varieties of fungi , and hundreds of species of protists , algae , mosses and liverworts that live some part of their life cycle as aeroplankton, often as spores , pollen , and wind-scattered seeds . Additionally, peripatetic microorganisms are swept into the air from terrestrial dust storms, and an even larger amount of airborne marine microorganisms are propelled high into the atmosphere in sea spray. Aeroplankton deposits hundreds of millions of airborne viruses and tens of millions of bacteria every day on every square meter around the planet.\n\nThe sea surface microlayer , compared to the sub-surface waters, contains elevated concentration of bacteria and viruses . These materials can be transferred from the sea-surface to the atmosphere in the form of wind-generated aqueous aerosols due to their high vapour tension and a process known as volatilisation . When airborne, these microbes can be transported long distances to coastal regions. If they hit land they can have an effect on animal, vegetation and human health. Marine aerosols that contain viruses can travel hundreds of kilometers from their source and remain in liquid form as long as the humidity is high enough (over 70%). These aerosols are able to remain suspended in the atmosphere for about 31 days. Evidence suggests that bacteria can remain viable after being transported inland through aerosols. Some reached as far as 200 meters at 30 meters above sea level. The process which transfers this material to the atmosphere causes further enrichment in both bacteria and viruses in comparison to either the SML or sub-surface waters (up to three orders of magnitude in some locations). \n\nMany animals live in terrestrial environments by thriving in transient often microscopic bodies of water and moisture, these include rotifers and gastrotrichs which lay resilient eggs capable of surviving years in dry environments, and some of which can go dormant themselves. Nematodes are usually microscopic with this lifestyle. Water bears, despite only having lifespans of a few months, famously can enter suspended animation during dry or hostile conditions and survive for decades. This allows them to be ubiquitous in terrestrial environments despite needing water to grow and reproduce. Many microscopic crustacean groups like copepods and amphipods (of which sandhoppers are members) and seed shrimp are known to go dormant when dry and live in transient bodies of water too \n\nGelatinous zooplankton are fragile animals that live in the water column in the ocean. Their delicate bodies have no hard parts and are easily damaged or destroyed. Gelatinous zooplankton are often transparent. All jellyfish are gelatinous zooplankton, but not all gelatinous zooplankton are jellyfish. The most commonly encountered organisms include ctenophores , medusae , salps , and Chaetognatha in coastal waters. However, almost all marine phyla, including Annelida , Mollusca and Arthropoda , contain gelatinous species, but many of those odd species live in the open ocean and the deep sea and are less available to the casual ocean observer. \n\nIchthyoplankton are the eggs and larvae of fish. They are mostly found in the sunlit zone of the water column , less than 200 metres deep, which is sometimes called the epipelagic or photic zone . Ichthyoplankton are planktonic , meaning they cannot swim effectively under their own power, but must drift with the ocean currents. Fish eggs cannot swim at all, and are unambiguously planktonic. Early stage larvae swim poorly, but later stage larvae swim better and cease to be planktonic as they grow into juveniles . Fish larvae are part of the zooplankton that eat smaller plankton, while fish eggs carry their food supply. Both eggs and larvae are themselves eaten by larger animals. Fish can produce high numbers of eggs which are often released into the open water column. Fish eggs typically have a diameter of about 1 millimetre (0.039 in). The newly hatched young of oviparous fish are called larvae . They are usually poorly formed, carry a large yolk sac (for nourishment), and are very different in appearance from juvenile and adult specimens. The larval period in oviparous fish is relatively short (usually only several weeks), and larvae rapidly grow and change appearance and structure (a process termed metamorphosis ) to become juveniles. During this transition larvae must switch from their yolk sac to feeding on zooplankton prey, a process which depends on typically inadequate zooplankton density, starving many larvae. In time fish larvae become able to swim against currents, at which point they cease to be plankton and become juvenile fish .\n\nHoloplankton are organisms that are planktic for their entire life cycle. Holoplankton can be contrasted with meroplankton , which are planktic organisms that spend part of their life cycle in the benthic zone . Examples of holoplankton include some diatoms , radiolarians , some dinoflagellates , foraminifera , amphipods , krill , copepods , and salps , as well as some gastropod mollusk species. Holoplankton dwell in the pelagic zone as opposed to the benthic zone . Holoplankton include both phytoplankton and zooplankton and vary in size. The most common plankton are protists . \n\nMeroplankton are a wide variety of aquatic organisms that have both planktonic and benthic stages in their life cycles. Much of the meroplankton consists of larval stages of larger organisms. Meroplankton can be contrasted with holoplankton , which are planktonic organisms that stay in the pelagic zone as plankton throughout their entire life cycle. After some time in the plankton, many meroplankton graduate to the nekton or adopt a benthic (often sessile ) lifestyle on the seafloor . The larval stages of benthic invertebrates make up a significant proportion of planktonic communities. The planktonic larval stage is particularly crucial to many benthic invertebrates in order to disperse their young. Depending on the particular species and the environmental conditions, larval or juvenile-stage meroplankton may remain in the pelagic zone for durations ranging from hours to months. \n\nPseudoplankton are organisms that attach themselves to planktonic organisms or other floating objects, such as drifting wood, buoyant shells of organisms such as Spirula , or man-made flotsam . Examples include goose barnacles and the bryozoan Jellyella . By themselves these animals cannot float , which contrasts them with true planktonic organisms, such as Velella and the Portuguese Man o' War , which are buoyant. Pseudoplankton are often found in the guts of filtering zooplankters . \n\nTychoplankton are organisms, such as free-living or attached benthic organisms and other non-planktonic organisms, that are carried into the plankton through a disturbance of their benthic habitat, or by winds and currents. This can occur by direct turbulence or by disruption of the substrate and subsequent entrainment in the water column. Tychoplankton are, therefore, a primary subdivision for sorting planktonic organisms by duration of lifecycle spent in the plankton, as neither their entire lives nor particular reproductive portions are confined to planktonic existence. Tychoplankton are sometimes called accidental plankton .\n\nApart from aeroplankton, plankton inhabits oceans, seas, lakes and ponds. Local abundance varies horizontally, vertically and seasonally. The primary cause of this variability is the availability of light. All plankton ecosystems are driven by the input of solar energy (but see chemosynthesis ), confining primary production to surface waters, and to geographical regions and seasons having abundant light.\n\nA secondary variable is nutrient availability. Although large areas of the tropical and sub-tropical oceans have abundant light, they experience relatively low primary production because they offer limited nutrients such as nitrate , phosphate and silicate . This results from large-scale ocean circulation and water column stratification . In such regions, primary production usually occurs at greater depth, although at a reduced level (because of reduced light).\n\nDespite significant macronutrient concentrations, some ocean regions are unproductive (so-called HNLC regions ). The micronutrient iron is deficient in these regions, and adding it can lead to the formation of phytoplankton algal blooms . Iron primarily reaches the ocean through the deposition of dust on the sea surface. Paradoxically, oceanic areas adjacent to unproductive, arid land thus typically have abundant phytoplankton (e.g., the eastern Atlantic Ocean , where trade winds bring dust from the Sahara Desert in north Africa ).\n\nWhile plankton are most abundant in surface waters, they live throughout the water column. At depths where no primary production occurs, zooplankton and bacterioplankton instead consume organic material sinking from more productive surface waters above. This flux of sinking material, so-called marine snow , can be especially high following the termination of spring blooms .\n\nThe local distribution of plankton can be affected by wind-driven Langmuir circulation and the biological effects of this physical process.\n\nAs well as representing the lower levels of a food chain that supports commercially important fisheries , plankton ecosystems play a role in the biogeochemical cycles of many important chemical elements , including the ocean's carbon cycle . Fish larvae mainly eat zooplankton, which in turn eat phytoplankton \n\nPrimarily by grazing on phytoplankton, zooplankton provide carbon to the planktic foodweb , either respiring it to provide metabolic energy, or upon death as biomass or detritus . Organic material tends to be denser than seawater , so it sinks into open ocean ecosystems away from the coastlines, transporting carbon along with it. This process, called the biological pump , is one reason that oceans constitute the largest carbon sink on Earth . However, it has been shown to be influenced by increments of temperature. In 2019, a study indicated that at ongoing rates of seawater acidification , Antarctic phytoplanktons could become smaller and less effective at storing carbon before the end of the century. \n\nIt might be possible to increase the ocean's uptake of carbon dioxide ( CO 2 ) generated through human activities by increasing plankton production through iron fertilization – introducing amounts of iron into the ocean. However, this technique may not be practical at a large scale. Ocean oxygen depletion and resultant methane production (caused by the excess production remineralising at depth) is one potential drawback. \n\nPhytoplankton absorb energy from the Sun and nutrients from the water to produce their own nourishment or energy. In the process of photosynthesis , phytoplankton release molecular oxygen ( O 2 ) into the water as a waste byproduct. It is estimated that about 50% of the world's oxygen is produced via phytoplankton photosynthesis. The rest is produced via photosynthesis on land by plants . Furthermore, phytoplankton photosynthesis has controlled the atmospheric CO 2 / O 2 balance since the early Precambrian Eon. \n\nThe absorption efficiency (AE) of plankton is the proportion of food absorbed by the plankton that determines how available the consumed organic materials are in meeting the required physiological demands. Depending on the feeding rate and prey composition, variations in absorption efficiency may lead to variations in fecal pellet production, and thus regulates how much organic material is recycled back to the marine environment. Low feeding rates typically lead to high absorption efficiency and small, dense pellets, while high feeding rates typically lead to low absorption efficiency and larger pellets with more organic content. Another contributing factor to dissolved organic matter (DOM) release is respiration rate. Physical factors such as oxygen availability, pH, and light conditions may affect overall oxygen consumption and how much carbon is loss from zooplankton in the form of respired CO 2 . The relative sizes of zooplankton and prey also mediate how much carbon is released via sloppy feeding . Smaller prey are ingested whole, whereas larger prey may be fed on more \"sloppily\", that is more biomatter is released through inefficient consumption. There is also evidence that diet composition can impact nutrient release, with carnivorous diets releasing more dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and ammonium than omnivorous diets. \n\nThe growth of phytoplankton populations is dependent on light levels and nutrient availability. The chief factor limiting growth varies from region to region in the world's oceans. On a broad scale, growth of phytoplankton in the oligotrophic tropical and subtropical gyres is generally limited by nutrient supply, while light often limits phytoplankton growth in subarctic gyres. Environmental variability at multiple scales influences the nutrient and light available for phytoplankton, and as these organisms form the base of the marine food web, this variability in phytoplankton growth influences higher trophic levels. For example, at interannual scales phytoplankton levels temporarily plummet during El Niño periods, influencing populations of zooplankton, fishes, sea birds, and marine mammals .\n\nThe effects of anthropogenic warming on the global population of phytoplankton is an area of active research. Changes in the vertical stratification of the water column, the rate of temperature-dependent biological reactions, and the atmospheric supply of nutrients are expected to have important impacts on future phytoplankton productivity. Additionally, changes in the mortality of phytoplankton due to rates of zooplankton grazing may be significant.\n\nZooplankton are the initial prey item for almost all fish larvae as they switch from their yolk sacs to external feeding. Fish rely on the density and distribution of zooplankton to match that of new larvae, which can otherwise starve. Natural factors (e.g., current variations, temperature changes) and man-made factors (e.g. river dams, ocean acidification , rising temperatures) can strongly affect zooplankton populations, which can in turn strongly affect fish larval survival, and therefore breeding success.\n\nIt has been shown that plankton can be patchy in marine environments where there aren't significant fish populations and additionally, where fish are abundant, zooplankton dynamics are influenced by the fish predation rate in their environment. Depending on the predation rate, they could express regular or chaotic behavior. \n\nA negative effect that fish larvae can have on planktonic algal blooms is that the larvae will prolong the blooming event by diminishing available zooplankton numbers; this in turn permits excessive phytoplankton growth allowing the bloom to flourish . \n\nThe importance of both phytoplankton and zooplankton is also well-recognized in extensive and semi-intensive pond fish farming. Plankton population-based pond management strategies for fish rearing have been practiced by traditional fish farmers for decades, illustrating the importance of plankton even in man-made environments.\n\nOf all animal fecal matter, it is whale feces that is the 'trophy' in terms of increasing nutrient availability. Phytoplankton are the powerhouse of open ocean primary production and they can acquire many nutrients from whale feces. In the marine food web, phytoplankton are at the base of the food web and are consumed by zooplankton & krill, which are preyed upon by larger and larger marine organisms, including whales, so it can be said that whale feces fuels the entire food web.\n\nPlankton have many direct and indirect effects on humans.\n\nAround 70% of the oxygen in the atmosphere is produced in the oceans from phytoplankton performing photosynthesis, meaning that the majority of the oxygen available for us and other organisms that respire aerobically is produced by plankton. \n\nPlankton also make up the base of the marine food web, providing food for all the trophic levels above. Recent studies have analyzed the marine food web to see if the system runs on a top-down or bottom-up approach . Essentially, this research is focused on understanding whether changes in the food web are driven by nutrients at the bottom of the food web or predators at the top. The general conclusion is that the bottom-up approach seemed to be more predictive of food web behavior. This indicates that plankton have more sway in determining the success of the primary consumer species that prey on them than do the secondary consumers that prey on the primary consumers.\n\nIn some cases, plankton act as an intermediate host for deadly parasites in humans. One such case is that of cholera , an infection caused by several pathogenic strains of Vibrio cholerae . These species have been shown to have a symbiotic relationship with chitinous zooplankton species like copepods . These bacteria benefit not only from the food provided by the chiton from the zooplankton, but also from the protection from acidic environments. Once the copepods have been ingested by a human host, the chitinous exterior protects the bacteria from the stomach acids in the stomach and proceed to the intestines. Once there, the bacteria bind with the surface of the small intestine and the host will start developing symptoms, including extreme diarrhea, within five days. ",
  "Urdu poetry ( Urdu : اُردُو شاعرى Urdū šāʿirī ) is a tradition of poetry and has many different forms. Today, it is an important part of the culture of India and Pakistan . According to Naseer Turabi, there are five major poets of Urdu: Mir Taqi Mir (d. 1810), Mirza Ghalib (d. 1869), Mir Anees (d. 1874), Muhammad Iqbal (d. 1938) and Josh Malihabadi (d. 1982). The language of Urdu reached its pinnacle under the British Raj , and it received official status. All famous writers of Urdu language including Ghalib and Iqbal were given British scholarships. Following the Partition of India in 1947, it found major poets and scholars were divided along the nationalistic lines. However, Urdu poetry is cherished in both the nations. Both the Muslims and Hindus from across the border continue the tradition.\n\nIt is fundamentally performative poetry and its recital, sometimes impromptu, is held in Mushairas (poetic expositions). Although its tarannum saaz (singing aspect) has undergone major changes in recent decades, its popularity among the masses remains unaltered. Mushairas are today held in metropolitan areas worldwide because of the cultural influence of the South Asian diaspora . Ghazal singing and Qawwali are also important expository forms of Urdu poetry.\n\nThe principal forms of Urdu poetry are: \n\nThe principal collection forms of Urdu poetry are: \n\nUrdu poetry forms itself with following basic ingredients:\n\nThe major genres of poetry found in Urdu are:\n\nIn the Urdu poetic tradition, most poets use a pen name called the Takhallus (تخلص). This can be either a part of a poet's given name or something else adopted as an identity. The traditional convention in identifying Urdu poets is to mention the takhallus at the end of the name.\nThe word takhallus is derived from Arabic, meaning \"ending\". This is because in the Ghazal form, the poet would usually incorporate his or her pen name into the final couplet ( Arabic : مقطع , romanized : maqta' ) of each poem.\n\nIn Pakistan and Deccan region of India , Urdu poetry is written in the standard Nasta'liq calligraphy style of the Perso-Arabic script . However, in north India, where Urdu poetry is very popular, the Perso-Arabic is often found transliterated into the Devanāgarī script , as an aid for those Hindī -speakers, who can comprehend Urdu, but cannot read the Perso-Arabic script . With the dawn of the internet and globalization, this poetry is often found written in Roman Urdu as well as in Hindi script .\n\nThe following is a verse from an Urdu ghazal by Syed Khwaja Mir Dard :\n\nUrdu :\n\nRoman Urdu :\n\nEnglish translation :\n\nNote Dard's use of the royal we in this couplet, a technique characteristic of formal Urdu poetry.",
  "The Young British Artists , or YBAs —also referred to as Brit artists and Britart —is a loose group of visual artists who first began to exhibit together in London in 1988. Many of the YBA artists graduated from the BA Fine Art course at Goldsmiths , in the late 1980s, whereas some from the group had trained at Royal College of Art . \n\nThe scene began around a series of artist-led exhibitions held in warehouses and factories, beginning in 1988 with the Damien Hirst-led Freeze and, in 1990, East Country Yard Show and Modern Medicine .\n\nThey are noted for \"shock tactics\", use of throwaway materials, wild living, and an attitude \"both oppositional and entrepreneurial\". They achieved considerable media coverage and dominated British art during the 1990s; internationally reviewed shows in the mid-1990s included Brilliant! and Sensation .\n\nMany of the artists were initially supported and their works collected by Charles Saatchi . One notable exception is Angus Fairhurst . Leading artists of the group include Damien Hirst and Tracey Emin . Key works include Hirst's The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living , a shark preserved in formaldehyde in a vitrine , and Emin's My Bed , a dishevelled double bed surrounded by detritus. \n\nThere is some disagreement as to the first use of the term \"young British artists.\" Tate claims that it was Michael Corris in a footnote in Artforum , May 1992, Others claim that it was Saatchi who had already entitled his exhibition Young British Artists I in March 1992. The acronym \"YBA\" (or \"yBa\") was not coined until 1994. It has become a historic term, as most of the YBAs were born in the mid-1960s. \n\nThe core of the YBA group graduated from the Goldsmiths BA Fine Art degree course in the classes of 1987–90. Liam Gillick , Fiona Rae , Steve Park and Sarah Lucas , were graduates in the class of 1987. Ian Davenport , Michael Landy , Gary Hume , Anya Gallaccio , Lala Meredith-Vula , Henry Bond , Angela Bulloch , were graduates in the class of 1988; Damien Hirst , Angus Fairhurst , Mat Collishaw , Simon Patterson , and Abigail Lane , were graduates from the class of 1989; whilst Gillian Wearing , and Sam Taylor-Wood , were graduates from the class of 1990, and Jason Martin was graduated with the class of 1993. During the years 1987–1990, the teaching staff on the Goldsmiths BA Fine Art included Jon Thompson , Richard Wentworth , Michael Craig-Martin , Ian Jeffrey , Helen Chadwick , Mark Wallinger , Judith Cowan and Glen Baxter .\n\nGavin Turk and Mark Francis are also part of the YBA group of artists. Turk and Francis studied at Chelsea School of Art from 1986 to 1989, and at the Royal College of Art from 1989 to 1991. Turk and Francis exhibited work in the Saatchi Sensation exhibition at the Royal Academy.\n\nA group of sixteen Goldsmiths students took part in a group exhibition of art, called Freeze , of which Damien Hirst became the main organiser; he was still in the second year of a BA in Fine Art.\n\nCommercial galleries had shown a lack of interest in the project, and it was held in a cheap non-art space, a London Docklands admin block (usually referred to as a warehouse). The event resonated with the ' Acid house ' warehouse rave scene prevalent at the time, but did not achieve any major press exposure. One of its effects was to set an example of artist-as-curator—in the mid-1990s artist-run exhibition spaces and galleries became a feature of the London arts scene. \n\nThere was a less prominent predecessor organized by artist Angus Fairhurst , featuring himself, Damien Hirst , Abigail Lane , and Mat Collishaw in a small show called Progress by Degree at the Bloomsbury Gallery of the University of London (Institute of Education) shortly before Freeze. \n\nIn liaison with Hirst, Carl Freedman (who had been friends with him in Leeds before Hirst moved to London and was helping to make Hirst's vitrines) and Billee Sellman then curated two influential \"warehouse\" shows in 1990, Modern Medicine and Gambler , in a Bermondsey former factory they designated Building One. To stage Modern Medicine they raised £1,000 sponsorships from artworld figures including Charles Saatchi . Freedman has spoken openly about the self-fulfilling prophecy these sponsors helped to create, and also commented that not many people attended these early shows, including Freeze .\nIn 1990, Henry Bond and Sarah Lucas organised the East Country Yard Show in a disused warehouse in London Docklands which was installed over four floors and 16,000m 2 of exhibition space. Writing in The Independent , art critic Andrew Graham-Dixon said:\n\n\"Goldsmiths graduates are unembarrassed about promoting themselves and their work: some of the most striking exhibitions in London over the past few months—\"The East Country Yard Show\", or \"Gambler\", both staged in docklands—have been independently organized and funded by Goldsmiths graduates as showcases for their work. This has given them a reputation for pushiness, yet it should also be said that in terms of ambition, attention to display and sheer bravado there has been little to match such shows in the country's established contemporary art institutions. They were far superior, for instance, to any of the contemporary art shows that have been staged by the Liverpool Tate in its own multi-million-pound dockland site.\" \n\nEstablished alternative spaces such as City Racing at the Oval in London and Milch gave many artists their first exposure. There was much embryonic activity in the Hoxton / Shoreditch area of East London focused on Joshua Compston 's gallery. In 1991, the Serpentine Gallery presented a survey of this group of artists with the exhibition Broken English . In 1992, Charles Saatchi staged a series of exhibitions of Young British Art , the first show included works by Sarah Lucas , Rachel Whiteread and Damien Hirst .\n\nA second wave of Young British Artists appeared in 1992–1993 through exhibitions such as New Contemporaries , New British Summertime and Minky Manky (curated by Carl Freedman). This included Douglas Gordon , Christine Borland , Fiona Banner , Tracey Emin , Tacita Dean , Georgina Starr and Jane and Louise Wilson . One exhibition which included several of the YBA artists was the 1995 quin-annual British Art Show .\n\nThe Young British Artists revitalised (and in some cases spawned) a whole new generation of contemporary commercial galleries such as Karsten Schubert , Sadie Coles , Victoria Miro , Maureen Paley 's Interim Art , and Jay Jopling 's White Cube . The spread of interest improved the market for contemporary British art magazines through increased advertising and circulation. Frieze launched in 1991 embraced the YBAs from the start while established publications such as Art Monthly , Art Review , Modern Painters and Contemporary Art were all re-launched with more focus on emerging British artists.\n\nOne of the visitors to Freeze was Charles Saatchi , a major contemporary art collector and co-founder of Saatchi and Saatchi , the London advertising agency. Saatchi then visited Gambler in a green Rolls-Royce and, according to Freedman, stood open-mouthed with astonishment in front of (and then bought) Hirst's first major \"animal\" installation, A Thousand Years , consisting of a large glass case containing maggots and flies feeding off a rotting cow's head. (The installation was later a notable feature of the Sensation exhibition.)\n\nSaatchi became not only Hirst's main collector, but also the main sponsor for other YBAs–a fact openly acknowledged by Gavin Turk. The contemporary art market in London had dramatically collapsed in mid-1990 due to a major economic recession, and many commercial contemporary galleries had gone out of business. Saatchi had until this time collected mostly American and German contemporary art, some by young artists, but most by already established ones.\n\nHis collection was publicly exhibited in a series of shows in a large converted paint factory building in St John's Wood, north London. Saatchi's Gallery inspired young artists to produce large concept artworks that would not fit in the usually small galleries in London at that time. Previous Saatchi Gallery shows had included such major figures as Warhol , Guston , Alex Katz , Serra , Kiefer , Polke , Richter and many more. In the early-1990s, Saatchi altered his focus to emerging British art.\n\nSaatchi put on a series of shows called Young British Artists starting in 1992, when a noted exhibit was Damien Hirst's \"shark\" ( The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living ), which became the iconic work of British art in the 1990s, and the symbol of Britart worldwide. In addition to (and as a direct result of) Saatchi's patronage, the Young British Artists benefited from intense media coverage. This was augmented by controversy surrounding the annual Turner Prize , (one of Britain's few major awards for contemporary artists), which had several of the artists as nominees or winners. Channel 4 had become a sponsor of the competition, leading to television profiles of the artists in prime-time slots.\n\nThe consolidation of the artists' status began in 1995 with a large-scale group exhibition Brilliant! held at the Walker Art Center a respected art museum in Minneapolis, USA. The term \"yBa\" was already used in 1994 and later used by Simon Ford in a feature \"Myth Making\" in March 1996 in Art Monthly magazine. \n\nArt dealer Jay Jopling began to represent YBAs Jake & Dinos Chapman, Tracey Emin, Marcus Harvey , Damien Hirst, Gary Hume , Marc Quinn , Gavin Turk and Sam Taylor-Wood, whom he married in 1998. Before Jopling, Karsten Schubert was the most important dealer of artists that were later called YBAs. Shortly after Freeze he exhibited Ian Davenport, Gary Hume , and Michael Landy in November 1988, who all exhibited in Freeze, in his gallery. \n\nIn 1997, the Royal Academy staged an exhibition of the private art collection of Charles Saatchi titled Sensation , which included many works by YBA artists.\n\nThe exhibition was actually a showing of Charles Saatchi 's private collection of their work, and he owned the major pieces. The liaison was effected by the Academy's Norman Rosenthal , even though there was strong opposition from some of the Academicians, three of whom resigned. Controversy engendered in the media about the show, particularly over Marcus Harvey's work Myra , served to reinforce the YBAs' importance. When the show toured to New York there was further controversy caused by the inclusion of Chris Ofili 's work The Holy Virgin Mary (1996). \n\nIn 1997, Gillian Wearing won the annual Turner Prize . In 1998, Chris Ofili won the annual Turner Prize.\n\nIn 1999, Tracey Emin was nominated for the Turner Prize . Her main exhibit, My Bed , consisting literally of her dishevelled, stained bed, surrounded by detritus including condoms, slippers and soiled underwear, created an immediate and lasting media impact and further heightened her prominence. The emergence at the same time of an anti-YBA group, The Stuckists , co-founded by her ex boyfriend, Billy Childish , gave another angle to media coverage.\n\nIn 2003, YBAs Jake and Dinos Chapman and Anya Gallaccio were nominated for the annual Turner Prize.\n\nOn 24 May 2004, a fire in a storage warehouse destroyed some works from the Saatchi collection, including the Chapman Brothers' Hell and Tracey Emin's \"tent\", Everyone I Have Ever Slept With 1963–1995 . \n\nIn 2008, YBA Angus Fairhurst died by suicide.\n\nIn the 2011 Birthday Honours List, Sam Taylor-Wood and Gillian Wearing were appointed to the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II . \n\nSeveral of the YBAs have been elected as lifetime members of the Royal Academy of Arts in London (founded by George III in 1768); hence they are \"Royal Academicians,\" and may use the letters \"RA\" after their name to indicate this.\n\nRichard Cork (at one time art critic of The Times ) has been a staunch advocate of the artists, as has art writer Louisa Buck , and former Time Out art editor, Sarah Kent . Sir Nicholas Serota has validated the artists by the nomination of several of them for the Turner Prize and their inclusion in the Tate collection.\n\nMaureen Paley said, \"The thing that came out of the YBA generation was boldness, a belief that you can get away with anything.\" \n\nSpeaking in 2009, Iwona Blazwick , the director of the Whitechapel Art Gallery , said, \"The YBA moment is definitely now dead, but anyone who thinks they were a cut-off point is wrong. They began something which has continued to grow ever since. It's not over.\" \n\nIn 1998, John Windsor in The Independent said that the work of the YBAs seemed tame compared with that of the \" shock art \" of the 1970s, including \"kinky outrages\" at the Nicholas Treadwell Gallery, amongst which were a \"hanging, anatomically detailed leather straitjacket, complete with genitals\", titled Pink Crucifixion , by Mandy Havers. \n\nIn 1999 the Stuckists art group was founded with an overt anti-YBA agenda. In 2002 Britart was heavily criticised by the leading conductor Sir Simon Rattle , who was, in return, accused of having a poor understanding of conceptual and visual art. \n\nPlaywright Tom Stoppard made a public denunciation, and Brian Sewell (art critic of the Evening Standard ) was consistently hostile, as was David Lee , the editor of Jackdaw . Rolf Harris , the television presenter and artist, singled out Tracey Emin's My Bed as the kind of installation that put people off art. \"I don't see how getting out of bed and leaving the bed unmade and putting it on show and saying that's worth, I don't know £31,000 ... I don't believe it, I think it's a con.\"\n\nFor James Heartfield , \"The 1990s art boom encouraged sloppiness. The Young British Artists preferred the inspired gesture to patient work. They added public outrage to their palettes, only to find that it faded very quickly.\" \n\nMembers of the group are parodied in a regular cartoon strip by Birch, titled \"Young British Artists\", in the British satirical magazine Private Eye . [ citation needed ] The scene is also parodied in Jilly Cooper 's 2002 bonkbuster Pandora . \n\nFemale artists were distinctly a minority amongst the male dominated environment of the Young British Artists. Individuals such as Sarah Lucas , Jenny Saville and Rachel Whiteread have varied levels of neglect within their media portrayals, as well as incomparable in notoriety to male YBA peers such as Hirst. \n\nThe University of Sussex's Art Society Journal describes how feminists in the 1980s influenced the female members of the Young British Artists' artwork through the strategy of subverting feminine stereotypes. Other discourse around female YBA work include a discussion of Rachel Whiteread 's sculpture practice. Whiteread has been said to disrupt the 'clear' concept of women making 'female work'. Her work Nine Tables attempts to exist within a third space, where the forms can't be physically gendered, but still viewed as a feminine objects. Daniel Ogilivie has expressed how Judith Butler 's concept of which \"…the mere act of 'doing', of casting the object, that expresses the gender and it is not any anthropomorphic association in the artwork itself,\" creates the feminine within Whiteread's work. \n\nWith the prevalence of feminist ideology in society and the contemporary art, critics have argued that female artists like Jenny Saville in the 1990s investigated the contrived idea of 'feminity' made by the Patriarchal Structure. While attending art school in Cincinnati, Saville's feminist passion was conceived through a realisation of gender within art history. In her own words, she discovered that, \"I'd always wondered why there had been no women artists in history. I found there had been – but not reported. I realized I'd been affected by male ideas, going through a male-dominated art college\". Now consciously aware of institutional patriarchy, Saville began to paint female nudes that were not idealised. Rather than continue the recognised historical male view of female bodies, Saville created depictions of natural women with genuine flaws. Pubic hair trailing up stomachs and around thighs, discoloured skin and areas of excess flesh. Deconstructing the feminine body, Saville has stated that, \"I'm not trying to teach, just make people discuss, look at how women have been made by man. What is beauty? Beauty is usually the male image of the female body. My women are beautiful in their individuality.\" ",
  "A skipping rope (or jump rope ) is a tool used in a sport involving rhythmic jumping over a rope swung underfoot and overhead. The activity, practiced both recreationally and competitively, encompasses disciplines such as freestyle routines—featuring creative techniques—and speed events focused on maximizing jumps within timed intervals.\n\nOriginating from indigenous practices observed in the 16th century and later popularized in 17th-century Europe, rope skipping transitioned from a gendered pastime to a widespread sport. It flourished notably in 19th-century urbanized societies, where it became a fixture of children's culture.\n\nGoverned globally by organizations such as the International Jump Rope Union (IJRU), the sport is recognized for its cardiovascular benefits, offering efficient calorie expenditure and coordination improvement. Competitive frameworks include international tournaments categorized by age, sex, and skill, showcasing techniques ranging from basic jumps to advanced maneuvers like double unders and crossover steps.\n\nThe activity gained renewed prominence during the COVID-19 pandemic as an accessible home-based exercise, supported by equipment variations such as weighted, beaded, and speed ropes tailored to diverse training needs.\n\nExplorers reported seeing aborigines jumping with vines in the 16th century. [ where? ] European boys started skipping in the early 17th century. The activity was considered indecent for girls due to concerns of them showing their ankles. Girls began skipping in the 18th century, adding skipping chants , owning the rope, controlling the game, and deciding who may participate. \n\nIn the United States, domination of the activity by girls emerged as their families moved into cities in the late 19th century. There, they found sidewalks and other smooth surfaces conducive to skipping, along with a high density of peers with whom to engage in the sport. Educator Lucy Nulton studied the rhymes that American children chanted or sang while jumping rope in the mid-20th century. \n\nThere are many techniques that can be used when skipping. These can be used individually or combined in a series to create a routine.\n\nFor solo jumping, the participant jumps and swings the rope under their feet. The timing of the swing is matched to the jump. This allows them to jump the rope and establish a rhythm more successfully. This can be contrasted with swinging the rope at the feet and jumping, which would mean they were matching the jump to the swing. This makes it harder to jump the rope and establish a rhythm.\n\nJump with both feet slightly apart over the rope. Beginners usually master this technique first before moving onto more advanced techniques. [ citation needed ]\n\nTurn the rope slowly and jump once before jumping over the rope as in a basic jump.\n\nUse alternate feet to jump off the ground. This technique can be used to effectively double the number of jumps per minute as compared to the above technique. This step can be used for speed events. \n\nAlso known as crossover, cross arms, or simply a cross. Perform the basic jump whilst crossing arms in front of the body.\n\nThe rope is passed by the side of the participant's body without jumping it.\n\nPerform the criss-cross whilst crossing one arm behind the back. [ citation needed ]\n\nA high basic jump, turning the rope twice under the feet. Turning the rope three times is called a triple under. In competitions, participants may attempt quadruple (quads) and quintuple under (quins) using the same method. [ citation needed ] The Guinness World Record currently belongs to Kirato Hitaka, who has managed to do 8 revolutions in one jump. \n\nOne foot is positioned slightly forward and one foot slightly back. The person positions their bodyweight primarily over their front foot, with the back foot acting as a stabiliser. From this stance, the person jumps up several times (often 2-3 times) before switching their stance, so the front foot becomes the back foot, and the back foot becomes the front foot. And so forth. An advantage of this technique is that it allows the back leg a brief rest. So while both feet are still used in the jump, a person may find they can skip for longer than if they were using the basic two-footed technique.\n\nPerform the criss-cross with one arm crossing under the opposite leg from the inside.\n\nA basic jump with one arm hooked under the adjacent leg. Doing Crougar with the non-dominant leg in the air is easier\n\nAlso known as Awesome Anna or swish. Alternates between a leg over and a toad without a jump in between.\n\nPerform the toad whilst one arm crosses the adjacent leg from the outside. [ citation needed ]\n\nA cross between the inverse toad and the toad, with both arms crossing under one leg. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe participant does a handstand , returns to their feet, and turns the rope under them. A more advanced version turns the rope during the return to the ground. [ citation needed ]\n\nA triple-under where the first 'jump' is a side swing, the middle jump is a toad and the final jump in the open.\n\nOne hand lets go of the rope, which is then swung in a loop on the side. The rope is caught and jumping continues. First demonstrated by Mike Fry in 2004. [ unreliable source? ]\n\nOne hand lets go of the rope, which is swung on one side, then pulled over to the other side, and back and forth. After a number of swings, the rope is recaught. Jumping can continue throughout. \n\nIn competitions, participants are required to demonstrate competence using specific techniques. The selection depends on the judging system and the country in which the tournament is held. \n\nSkipping may be used as a cardiovascular workout, similar to jogging or bicycle riding , and has a high MET or intensity level . This aerobic exercise can achieve a \"burn rate\" of up to 700 to over 1,200 calories per hour of vigorous activity, with about 0.1 to nearly 1.1 calories consumed per jump, mainly depending upon the speed and intensity of jumps and leg foldings. [ citation needed ] Ten minutes of skipping are roughly the equivalent of running an eight-minute mile. Skipping for 16–20 minutes is enough to burn off the calories from a candy bar and is equivalent to 45–60 minutes of running, depending upon the intensity of jumps and leg swings. Many professional trainers, fitness experts, and professional fighters greatly recommend skipping for burning fat over any other alternative exercises like running and jogging. \n\nWeighted skipping ropes are available for such athletes to increase the difficulty and effectiveness of such exercise. Individuals or groups can participate in the exercise, and learning proper techniques is relatively simple compared to many other athletic activities. The exercise is also appropriate for a wide range of ages and fitness levels.\n\nSkipping grew in popularity in 2020 when gyms closed or people stayed home due to coronavirus restrictions across the world. These workouts can be done at home and do not require specialized equipment.\n\nThe world governing body for the sport of jump rope is the International Jump Rope Union (IJRU) . It is a merger of two previous rival world organizations: the International Rope Skipping Federation (FISAC-IRSF), and the World Jump Rope Federation (WJRF). There have been 11 World Championships on every alternate year by FISAC-IRSF, with the final competition being held in Shanghai , China. There have been 7 World Jump Rope Championships held every year by (WJRF); the final competition taking place in Oslo , Norway. Previous locations of this championship included Washington DC, Orlando, France, and Portugal. IJRU held its first World Tournament in Colorado City, Colorado in 2023 and plans to hold its second one in Kawasaki, Japan in 2025. \n\nIn 2018, FISAC-IRSF and WJRF announced the merger organization IJRU . IJRU has become the 10th International Federation to gain GAISF Observer status. The decision was taken by the Global Association of International Sports Federations (GAISF) Council, which met during SportAccord in Bangkok. Observer status is the first step on a clear pathway for new International Federations towards the top of the Olympic Family pyramid. Those who wish to proceed will be assisted by GAISF, leading them into full GAISF membership through the Alliance of Independent Recognised Members of Sport (AIMS), and the Association of IOC Recognised International Sports Federations (ARISF). \n\nIn 2019 the International Rope Skipping Organisation (IRSO) . re-emerged and reactivated its activities as governing body of skipping rope sport. The organization is headed by Richard Cendali, who is referred to as the grandfather of the sport of jump rope. IRSO had disagreements with both FISAC-IRSF and WJRF for ignoring several long-standing organizations in their merger. Various jump rope organizations that were long-standing for the development of the sport were left out of the merger of IJRU and came under IRSO under the leadership of Richard Cendali. The USA Jump Rope Federation and newly formed Asian Rope Skipping Association also joined IRSO and decided to host their World Championship in conjunction with AAU.\n\nThe first World Inter-School Rope Skipping Championship was held at Dubai, November 2015. [ excessive citations ] The second World Inter-School Rope Skipping Championship was held at Eger, Hungary. The Championship was organized by World Inter School Rope Skipping Organisation (WIRSO). Second, third and fourth World Inter-School championships held in Hungary 2017, Hong Kong 2018 and Belgium 2019 respectively.\n\nHistorically, there were two competing jump rope organizations in the United States : the International Rope Skipping Organization (IRSO), and the World Rope Skipping Federation (WRSF). IRSO focused on stunt -oriented and gymnastic or athletic type moves, while WRSF appreciated the aesthetics and form of the exercise. In 1995, these two organizations merged to form the United States Amateur Jump Rope Federation which is today now known as USA Jump Rope (USAJR).USAJR has hosted annual national tournaments, as well as camps, workshops, and clinics on instruction since 1995. Jump rope is also part of the Amateur Athletic Union and participates in their annual AAU Junior Olympic Games . More recently, the American Jump Rope Federation was founded in 2016 by previous members of WJRF. It is recognized as the official governing body for the sport of jump rope in the United States by IJRU. \n\nThe National Collegiate Jump Rope Association was formed in 2019 by a group of students. \n\nIn the US, schools rarely have jump rope teams, and few states have sanctioned official events at the elementary school level.\n\nSpeed jump ropes are made from a thin vinyl cord or wire and are primarily used for speed jumping or double unders. They are best for indoor use, because they will wear down fast on concrete or other harsh surfaces. Licorice jump ropes are also made from vinyl cord or PVC and are primarily used for freestyle jumping. The beaded ropes make rhythmic jumping very easy, because the jumper can hear the beads hitting the ground and strive for a rhythmic pattern. Leather jump ropes are thicker and is less likely to tangle or wear down with outdoor use.\n\nMedia related to Jump ropes at Wikimedia Commons",
  "Alligator II: The Mutation is a 1991 American monster horror film directed by Jon Hess and starring Joseph Bologna , Woody Brown , Harlan Arnold, Nicolas Cowan, and Brock Peters . It is a sequel to the 1980 film, Alligator .\n\nDeep in the sewers beneath the city of Regent Park, another baby alligator feeds on the experimental animals discarded by Future Chemicals Corporation. Nourished by toxic growth hormones and other mutating chemicals, the gator grows immensely, develops a voracious appetite and goes out on a killing spree. No one believes the sightings until a large number of people are killed, and the police eventually embark on a search-and-destroy mission to put a stop to the alligator's murderous rampage. They track it down to a lake and a police helicopter attempts to blow the alligator up. Two officers enter a marsh area, to where the alligator had escaped. One of the officers uses a rocket launcher and ends the alligator's reign of terror.\n\nThe film's plot has similar elements to the first one. Local tycoon Vincent Brown ( Steve Railsback ) dumps a tank full of chemicals from Future Chemicals into the sewers. The repeated dumping has mutated a baby alligator to a massive size. Two Mexican fishermen are killed and local Detective David Hodges ( Joseph Bologna ), notorious for working alone, begins to investigate. While the fishermen's community suspects Brown, a severed leg leads Hodges's wife Chris, a local expert at the university, and the coroner to identify the incident as an alligator attack. Brown has been planning a town party at the lake that Hodges tries to get Mayor Anderson to call off. The Mayor and local police chief refuse.\n\nHodges reluctantly enlists rookie police officer Rich Harmon, but their attempt to kill the mutant alligator fails. Professional alligator hunter Shai Hawkins and his friends and brother are summoned by Brown. They begin their hunt almost simultaneously with Hodges but fail, having underestimated the size of the creature. After losing his brother and two of his best friends, Hawkins joins Hodges and Harmon's team to hunt the alligator.\n\nHawkins and his team uncover proof that Brown dumped chemicals into the sewers. Brown has one of his men wreck Chief Speed's car, killing him, then gathers people down to his lake party. Hodges, Harmon, and Hawkins attempt to blow up the alligator with a homemade bomb, but the alligator damages the detonator and eats the bomb. The three pursue the alligator through the sewers after obtaining poison from Chris, while Chris and Harmon's girlfriend Sherri Anderson try to break up the party. Mayor Anderson turns on Brown, who murders him on the Ferris wheel. The alligator reaches the park, ravaging Brown's party and killing Brown and his henchman. Hodges, Harmon, and Hawkins head out on the lake to kill it, but it overturns their boat and devours Hawkins. Hodges stabs the alligator with the poison injector before a helicopter picks up him and Harmon, but the alligator does not die.\n\nHodges and Harmon, armed with rocket launchers, track the creature to its nest in the sewers. Harmon's shot narrowly misses the alligator. Hodges manages to shoot it in a soft spot on its skull, blowing off the back of its head and detonating the bomb. On returning to the surface, they are greeted as heroes, and Hodges acknowledges Harmon as his partner.\n\nThe film, given only a very limited theatrical release, received generally negative reviews, with some critics considering it a retread of the first film. In a review of the original film, Kim Newman of Empire noted that \" Alligator II: The Mutation is less a sequel than a lackluster remake\". Almar Haflidason of BBC Online wrote that the film lacked \"the wit and indeed the scares of the original\". ",
  "Wikimedia Commons , or simply Commons , is a wiki-based media repository of free-to-use images, sounds, videos and other media. It is a project of the Wikimedia Foundation .\n\nFiles from Wikimedia Commons can be used across all of the Wikimedia projects in all languages, including Wikipedia , Wikivoyage , Wikisource , Wikiquote , Wiktionary , Wikinews , Wikibooks and Wikispecies , and can also be downloaded for offsite use. As of April 2025, the repository contains over 118 million free-to-use media files, managed and editable by registered volunteers. \n\nThe idea for the project came from Erik Möller in March 2004 and Wikimedia Commons was started on September 7, 2004. In July 2013, the number of edits on Commons reached 100,000,000. In 2018, it became possible to upload 3D models to the site in STL format. One of the first models uploaded to Commons was a reconstruction of the Lion of Al-lāt statue in Palmyra , Syria , which was heavily damaged by ISIS in 2015. \n\nVarious notable organizations have uploaded files to Commons. In 2012, the National Archives and Records Administration uploaded 100,000 digitised images from its collection. In 2020, the Digital Public Library of America (DPLA) started uploading its collections to Commons. In 2022, DPLA uploaded more than two million files. Similarly Europeana , the website aggregating European cultural heritage, shares its digitised images through Commons. During the COVID-19 pandemic , as part of a collaboration with Wikimedia, the World Health Organization (WHO) uploaded its \" Mythbusters \" infographics to Commons. \n\nThe stated aim of Wikimedia Commons is to provide a media file repository \"that makes available public domain and freely-licensed educational media content to all, and that acts as a common repository for the various projects of the Wikimedia Foundation.\" \n\nMost Wikimedia projects still allow local uploads which are not visible to other projects or languages, but this option is meant to be used primarily for material (such as fair use content) which local project policies allow, but which would not be permitted according to the copyright policy of Commons. For this reason, Wikimedia Commons deletes copyright violations and aims to only host freely licensed media, such as media licensed with the Creative Commons Attribution and Attribution/ShareAlike licenses, other free content and free software licenses, and public domain media.\n\nThe site has been criticized for hosting large amounts of amateur pornography, often uploaded by exhibitionists who exploit the site for personal gratification, and who are enabled by sympathetic administrators. In 2012, BuzzFeed described Wikimedia Commons as \"littered with dicks \". \n\nIn 2010, Wikipedia co-founder Larry Sanger reported Wikimedia Commons to the FBI for hosting sexualized images of children known as \" lolicon \". After this was reported in the media, Jimmy Wales , founder of the Wikimedia Foundation which hosts Commons, used his administrator status to delete several images without discussion from the Commons community. Wales responded to the backlash from the Commons community by voluntarily relinquishing some site privileges, including the ability to delete files. \n\nOver time, additional functionality has been developed to interface Wikimedia Commons with the other Wikimedia projects. For instance, there exists a community-maintained Commons Mobile App which allows uploading of photos that document the world, especially notable objects findable in the map in the Nearby List in the app (displaying Wikidata items with coordinates). The app launched in 2012 as an official Wikimedia app and since May 2016, it uses the official Wikimedia Commons name and logo. [ citation needed ]\n\nStructured Data on Commons (SDC) is a three-year software development project funded by the Sloan Foundation [ citation needed ] to provide the infrastructure for Wikimedia Commons volunteers to organize data about media files in a consistent manner. This data is structured more and is made machine-readable . [ non-primary source needed ]\n\nThere are three mechanisms on the site for recognizing high-quality works. One is known as \" Featured pictures \", where works are nominated and other community members vote to accept or reject the nomination. This process began in November 2004. Another process known as \" Quality images \" began in June 2006, and has a simpler nomination process comparable to \"Featured pictures\". \"Quality images\" only accepts works created by Wikimedia users, whereas \"Featured pictures\" additionally accepts nominations of works by third parties such as NASA . A third image assessment project, known as \" Valued images \", began on June 1, 2008, with the purpose of recognizing \"the most valued illustration of its kind\", in contrast to the other two processes which assess images mainly on technical quality.\n\nThe Commons Picture of the Year (POTY) is a competition that runs every year since 2006. It aims to identify the best freely licensed images from Commons submissions, including those that during the year have been awarded Featured picture status. ",
  "This is a list of Hewitt mountains in England, Wales and Ireland by height . Hewitts are defined as \"Hills in England, Wales and Ireland over two thousand\" feet 2,000 feet (609.6 m) in height, the general requirement to be called a \"mountain\" in the British Isles, and with a prominence above 30 metres (98.4 ft); a mix of imperial and metric thresholds. \n\nThe Hewitt classification was suggested by Alan Dawson in his 1992 book, \"The Relative Hills of Britain\". Dawson originally called his Hewitts \"Sweats\", from \"Summits – Wales and England Above Two thousand\", before settling on the label Hewitt. In a series of three booklets edited by Dave Hewitt, the list of English Hewitts was published in 1997, and the list of Welsh Hewitts was also published in 1997, and the list of Irish Hewitts was published in 1998. Hewitts were designed to address one of the criticisms of the 1990 Nuttall classification, by requiring hills to have a relative height of 30 metres (98 ft), a threshold that the UIAA had set down in 1994 for an \"independent\" peak. In 2010, Dawson replaced the Hewitts with Simms , a fully metric equivalent of the Hewitt, with a 600 metres (1,969 ft) height threshold and 30 metres (98 ft) prominence threshold, however Dawson still maintains the Hewitt list. \n\nAs of October 2018 [update] there were 524 Hewitts identified, with 209 in Ireland, [ b ] 180 in England, and 135 in Wales, which is 1 less than the 1997 lists of 525 Hewitts. [ c ] Climbers who climb all of the Hewitts are called Hewitteers , with the first English & Welsh Hewitteer being Edward Moss on 22 July 1951. \n\nOn 5 December 2018, the BBC announced that Foel Penolau had been re-surveyed and promoted to Hewitt status (and by definition, to Simm status). As has Foel Cedig .\n\nThis list is from the Database of British and Irish Hills (\"DoBIH\") in October 2018, and are peaks the DoBIH marks as being Hewitts (\"Hew\"). [ d ] Alan Dawson updates the list of Hewitts from time to time, and the DoBIH also updates their measurements as more surveys are recorded, so these tables should not be amended or updated unless the entire DoBIH data is re-downloaded again.\n\nThe DoBIH uses the following codes for the various classifications of mountains and hills in the British Isles , which many of the above peaks also fall into: \n\nsuffixes: =\ttwin",
  "An autonomous municipality , county-level city or city , [ I ] previously provincial city , is a de jure second-level administrative division unit in the Republic of China (Taiwan) . \n\nThe provincial cities were formerly under the jurisdiction of provinces, but the provinces were streamlined and effectively downsized to non-self-governing bodies in 1998, in 2018 all provincial governmental organs were formally abolished. Provincial cities along counties , are presently regarded as de facto principal subdivisions directed by the central government of the ROC.\n\nThe first administrative divisions entitled \"city\" were established in the 1920s when Taiwan was under Japanese rule . At this time cities were under the jurisdiction of prefectures . After the World War II , nine (9) out of eleven (11) prefectural cities established by the Japanese government were reform into provincial cities. Their roman spellings are also changed to reflect the official language shift from Japanese to Mandarin Chinese , but characters remain the same.\n\nThe reform was based on the Laws on the City Formation ( 市組織法 ) of the Republic of China . This law was passed in the early 20th century. The criteria for being a provincial city included being the provincial capital as well as having a population of over 200,000, or over 100,000 if the city had particular significance in politics, economics, and culture. The division reform in 1945 had some compromises between the Japanese and the Chinese systems, some of the cities with population under the criteria were still be established as provincial cities.\n\nAfter the government of the Republic of China relocated to Taipei , Taiwan in 1949, the population criterion for provincial cities was raised to 500,000 in the Guidelines on the Implementation of Local Autonomy in the Counties and Cities of Taiwan Province ( 臺灣省各縣市實施地方自治綱要 ), which was passed in 1981. It was later raised again to 600,000. Since the streamline of provinces in 1998, provincial cities are all directly under the central government , and are simply referred to as cities .\n\nThe People's Republic of China (PRC), which claims Taiwan as its 23rd province , has all of its provincial cities classified as county-level city .\n\nCurrently, the Local Government Act of the Ministry of the Interior applies for the creation of a city , in which a city needs to have a population between 500,000 and 1,250,000 and occupies major political, economical and cultural roles. Note that all three existing cities are not qualified for the population test, they were built for historical reasons.\n\nThere are currently three cities , all in Taiwan Province :\n\nTheir self-governed bodies (executive and legislature) regulated by the Local Government Act are:",
  "See text\n\nWallia Alef\n\nWalnut trees are any species of tree in the plant genus Juglans , the type genus of the family Juglandaceae , the seeds of which are referred to as walnuts . All species are deciduous trees, 10–40 metres (33–131 ft) tall, with pinnate leaves 200–900 millimetres (7.9–35.4 in), with 5–25 leaflets; the shoots have chambered pith , a character shared with the wingnuts ( Pterocarya ), but not the hickories ( Carya ) in the same family.\n\nThe 21 species in the genus range across the north temperate Old World from southeast Europe east to Japan, and more widely in the New World from southeast Canada west to California and south to Argentina.\n\nEdible walnuts, which are consumed worldwide, are usually harvested from cultivated varieties of the species Juglans regia . China produces half of the world total of walnuts.\n\nThe common name walnut derives from Old English wealhhnutu , literally 'foreign nut' (from wealh 'foreign' + hnutu 'nut'), because it was introduced from Gaul and Italy. The Latin name for the walnut was nux Gallica , \" Gallic nut\". The name Juglans was apparently conjured by Linnaeus himself, replacing the prior Nux , [ disputed – discuss ] by combining Ju from Jupiter with the Latin glans meaning 'acorn', referring to the association of the plant with Jupiter by the Romans.\n\nTradition has it that a walnut tree should be beaten. This would have the benefit of removing dead wood and stimulating shoot formation. \n\nIn 2017, world production of walnuts (in shell) was 3.8 million tonnes , led by China with producing half of the world total (table). Other major producers were the United States (15%) and Iran (9%).\n\nThe two most commercially important species are J. regia for timber and nuts, and J. nigra for timber. Both species have similar cultivation requirements and are widely grown in temperate zones.\n\nWalnuts are light-demanding species that benefit from protection from wind. Walnuts are also very hardy against drought.\n\nInterplanting walnut plantations with a nitrogen fixing plant, such as Elaeagnus × ebbingei or Elaeagnus umbellata , and various Alnus species, results in a 30% increase in tree height and girth (Hemery 2001).\n\nWhen grown for nuts, care must be taken to select cultivars that are compatible for pollination purposes; although some cultivars are marketed as \"self fertile\", they will generally fruit better with a different pollination partner. Many different cultivars are available for growers, and offer different growth habits, flowering and leafing, kernel flavours and shell thicknesses. A key trait for more northerly latitudes of North America and Europe is phenology , with ‘late flushing’ being particularly important to avoid frost damage in spring. Some cultivars have been developed for novel ‘hedge’ production systems developed in Europe and would not suit more traditional orchard systems.\n\nThe leaves and blossoms of the walnut tree normally appear in spring. The male cylindrical catkins are developed from leafless shoots from the past year; they are about 10 cm (3.9 in) in length and have a large number of little flowers. Female flowers appear in a cluster at the peak of the current year’s leafy shoots. \n\nThe fruits of the walnut are a type of accessory fruit known as a pseudodrupe (or drupe-like nut), the outer covering of the fruit is an involucre - in a drupe the covering would be derived from the carpel. \n\nThe nut kernels of all the species are edible, but the walnuts most commonly traded are from the J. regia , the only species which has a large nut and thin shell. J. nigra kernels are also produced commercially in the US.\n\nTwo-thirds of the world export market [ citation needed ] [ how? ] and 99% of US walnuts are grown in California's Central Valley and in Coastal Valleys, from Redding in the north to Bakersfield in the south. Of the more than 30 varieties of J. regia grown there, Chandler and Hartley account for over half of total production. In California commercial production, the Hinds' black walnut ( J. hindsii ) and the hybrid between J. hindsii and J. regia , Juglans x paradox , are widely used as rootstocks for J. regia cultivars because of their resistance to Phytophthora and to a very limited degree, the oak root fungus. However, trees grafted on these rootstocks often succumb to black line. \n\nIn some countries, immature nuts in their husks are preserved in vinegar . In the UK, these are called pickled walnuts and this is one of the major uses for fresh nuts from the small scale plantings. In Armenian cuisine , unripe walnuts, including husks, are preserved in sugar syrup and eaten whole. In Italy, liqueurs called Nocino and Nocello are flavoured with walnuts, while Salsa di Noci (walnut sauce) is a pasta sauce originating from Liguria . In Georgia , walnuts are ground with other ingredients to make walnut sauce .\n\nWalnuts are heavily used in India. In Jammu , it is used widely as a prasad (offering) to Mother Goddess Vaisnav Devi and, generally, as a dry food in the season of festivals such as Diwali .\n\nThe nuts are rich in oil , and are widely eaten both fresh and in cookery . Walnut oil is expensive and consequently is used sparingly; most often in salad dressings . Walnut oil has been used in oil paint , as an effective binding medium, known for its clear, glossy consistency and nontoxicity.\n\nManos and Stone studied the composition of seed oils from several species of the Rhoipteleaceae and Juglandaceae and found the nut oils were generally more unsaturated from species which grow in the temperate zones and more saturated for species which grow in the tropical zones. In the northerly-growing section Trachycaryon , J. cinerea oil was reported to contain 15% linolenate (the report did not specify whether the linolenate was the alpha (n-3) or gamma (n-6) isomer, or perhaps a mixture), 2% of saturated palmitate , and a maximum concentration of 71% linoleate . In the section Juglans , J. regia nut oil was found to contain from 10% to 11% linolenate, 6% to 7% palmitate, and a maximum concentration of linoleate (62% to 68%). In the section Cardiocaryon , the nut oils of J. ailantifolia and J. mandshurica were reported to contain (respectively) 7% and 5% of linolenate, 2% of palmitate, and maximum concentrations of 74% and 79% linoleate. Within the section Rhysocaryon , the nut oils of the U.S. native black walnuts J. microcarpa and J. nigra were reported to contain (respectively) 7% and 3% linolenate, 4% and 3% palmitate, and 70% and 69% linoleate. The remaining results for black walnuts were: J. australis contained 2% linolenate, 7% palmitate, and 61% linoleate; J. boliviana contained 4% linolenate, 4% palmitate, and 70% linoleate; J. hirsuta contained 2% linolenate, 5% palmitate, and 75% linoleate; J. mollis contained 0% linolenate, 5% palmitate, 46% linoleate, and 49% oleate ; J. neotropica contained 3% linolenate, 5% palmitate, and 50% linoleate; and J. olanchana contained only a trace of linolenate, 9% palmitate, and 73% linoleate;\n\nThe walnut shell has a wide variety of uses. Eastern black walnut ( J. nigra ) shell is the hardest of the walnut shells, and therefore has the highest resistance to breakdown.\n\nWalnut husks are often used to create a rich yellow-brown to dark brown dye used for dyeing fabric , yarn or wood and for other purposes. The dye does not require a mordant and will readily stain the hand if picked without gloves.\n\nThe common walnut, and the black walnut and its allies, are important for their attractive timber, which is hard, dense, tight-grained and polishes to a very smooth finish. The color is dark chocolate or similar in the heartwood changing by a sharp boundary to creamy white in the sapwood. When kiln-dried, walnut wood tends toward a dull brown color, but when air-dried can become a rich purplish-brown. Because of its color, hardness and grain, it is a prized furniture and carving wood.\n\nWhen walnut vascular cambium is involved in a crotch (a branch fork), it behaves unusually, producing characteristic \"crotch figure\" in the wood which it makes. The grain figure exposed when a crotch in a walnut log is cut in the plane of its one entering branch and two exiting branches is attractive and sought after.\n\nThere are some differences between the wood of the European walnut ( Juglans regia ) and the wood of the black walnut ( Juglans nigra ). For example, Juglans regia wood sometimes has patches with a wavy texture. Black walnut wood tends to be darker than European walnut wood, and can suffer from paler sapwood that only really comes to light when the wood has been planed.\n\nWalnut wood has been the timber of choice for gun makers for centuries, including the Gewehr 98 and Lee–Enfield rifles of the First World War. It remains one of the most popular choices for rifle and shotgun stocks, and is generally considered to be the premium – as well as the most traditional – wood for gun stocks, due to its resilience to compression along the grain. Walnut is also used in lutherie and for the body of pipe organs .\n\nWalnut burls (or \"burrs\" in the rest of the world) are commonly used to create bowls and other turned pieces. Walnut burl veneer is one of the most valuable and highly prized by cabinet makers and prestige car manufacturers.\n\nThe wood of the butternut and related Asian species is of much lower value, softer, coarser, less strong and heavy, and paler in colour.\n\nFreshly sawn walnut heartwood may be greenish in color, but with exposure to air this color quickly changes to brown due to oxidation of the pigment.\n\nIn North America, forestry research has been undertaken, mostly on J. nigra , aiming to improve the quality of planting stock and markets. In some areas of the US, black walnut is the most valuable commercial timber species. The Walnut Council is the key body linking growers with scientists. In Europe, various EU-led scientific programmes have studied walnut growing for timber. \n\nThe Cherokee Indians would produce a black dye from walnut bark, which they used to dye cloth. As early as the 2nd century CE, shells and kernels of the edible walnut were used to make a dye solution in the Levant . \n\nWalnuts are very attractive trees in parks and large gardens. Walnut trees are easily propagated from the nuts. Seedlings grow rapidly on good soils. The Japanese walnut in particular is known for its huge leaves, which have a tropical appearance.\n\nAs garden trees, they have some drawbacks, in particular the falling nuts, and the releasing of the allelopathic compound juglone , though a number of gardeners do grow them. However, different walnut species vary in the amount of juglone they release from the roots and fallen leaves - J. nigra , in particular, is known for its toxicity, both to plants and horses. Juglone is toxic to plants such as tomato, apple, and birch , and may cause stunting and death of nearby vegetation. Juglone appears to be one of the walnut's primary defence mechanisms against potential competitors for resources (water, nutrients and sunlight), and its effects are felt most strongly inside the tree's \"drip line\" (the circle around the tree marked by the horizontal distance of its outermost branches). However, even plants at a seemingly great distance outside the drip line can be affected, and juglone can linger in the soil for several years even after a walnut is removed as its roots slowly decompose and release juglone into the soil.\n\nWalnut species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species. These include [ citation needed ] :\n\nThe nuts are consumed by other animals, such as mice and squirrels.\n\nIn California (US) and Switzerland, crows have been witnessed taking walnuts into their beaks, flying up to 60 feet or so in the air, and dropping them to the ground to crack the shells and eat the nut inside. \n\nThe raw edible seed of walnut is composed of 4% water, 14% carbohydrates , 15% protein , and 65% fat . In a 100 gram amount, walnuts provide 654 calories and are a rich source (≥20% of Daily Value ) of protein, dietary fiber , the B vitamins , niacin , vitamin B6 , and folate , and several dietary minerals , particularly manganese . \n\nWalnut oil is composed mostly of polyunsaturated fatty acids , particularly alpha-linolenic acid and linoleic acid , although it also contains oleic acid , a monounsaturated fat and 31% of total fat is saturated fat . \n\nThe genus Juglans is divided into four sections. \n\nThe best-known member of the genus is the Persian walnut ( J. regia , literally \"royal walnut\"), native from the Balkans in southeast Europe, southwest and central Asia to the Himalaya and southwest China. Walnuts are a traditional feature of Iranian cuisine ; the nation has extensive orchards which are an important feature of regional economies. In Kyrgyzstan alone, there are 230,700 ha of walnut-fruit forest, where J. regia is the dominant overstory tree (Hemery and Popov 1998). In non-European English-speaking nations, the nut of the J. regia is often called the \"English walnut\"; in Great Britain, the \"common walnut.\"\n\nThe eastern black walnut ( J. nigra ) is a common species in its native eastern North America, and is also widely cultivated elsewhere. The nuts are edible, and though they are often used in expensive baked goods, the Persian walnut is preferred for everyday use because it is easier to extract the nutmeat. The wood is particularly valuable.\n\nThe Hinds' black walnut ( J. hindsii ) is native to northern California, where it has been widely used commercially as a rootstock for J. regia trees. Hinds' black walnut shells do not have the deep grooves characteristic of the eastern black walnut.\n\nThe Japanese walnut ( J. ailantifolia ) is similar to butternut, distinguished by the larger leaves up to 90 cm long, and round (not oval) nuts. The variety cordiformis , often called the heartnut has heart-shaped nuts; the common name of this variety is the source of the sectional name Cardiocaryon.\n\nThe butternut ( J. cinerea ) is also native to eastern North America, where it is currently endangered by an introduced disease, butternut canker , caused by the fungus Sirococcus clavigignenti-juglandacearum . Its leaves are 40–60 cm long, the fruits are oval, the shell has very tall, very slender ridges, and the kernel is especially high in fat.\n\nA study of sequenced nuclear DNA from the external transcribed spacer (ETS) of ribosomal DNA (rDNA), the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of rDNA, and the second intron of the LEAFY gene taken from at least one individual of most of the species of Juglans has supported several conclusions:\n\nThe paper presenting these results did not publish any new names for the subdivisions of sect. Rhysocaryon , for any combinations of the other sections, or for J. olanchana var. standleyi .\n\nFossils of Juglans nuts have been described from the Tertiary period of North America. The paleontological history of Juglans regia in Europe shows signs of a post-Ice-Age re-expansíon from refugia in the southeast, much influenced by people carrying walnut nuts about after the numbers of humans had been much increased by the start of agriculture. [ citation needed ]",
  "A ritual is a sequence of activities involving gestures , words, actions, or revered objects. Rituals may be prescribed by the traditions of a community , including a religious community. Rituals are characterized, but not defined, by formalism , traditionalism , invariance, rule-governance, religious symbolism , and performance. \n\nRituals are a feature of all known human societies. They include not only the worship rites and sacraments of organized religions and cults , but also rites of passage , atonement and purification rites , oaths of allegiance , dedication ceremonies, coronations and presidential inaugurations , marriages, funerals and more. Even common actions like hand-shaking and saying \" hello \" may be termed as rituals .\n\nThe field of ritual studies has seen a number of conflicting definitions of the term. One given by Kyriakidis is that a ritual is an outsider's or \" etic \" category for a set activity (or set of actions) that, to the outsider, seems irrational, non-contiguous, or illogical. The term can be used also by the insider or \" emic \" performer as an acknowledgement that this activity can be seen as such by the uninitiated onlooker. \n\nIn psychology , the term ritual is sometimes used in a technical sense for a repetitive behavior systematically used by a person to neutralize or prevent anxiety; it can be a symptom of obsessive–compulsive disorder but obsessive-compulsive ritualistic behaviors are generally isolated activities.\n\nThe English word ritual derives from the Latin ritualis, \"that which pertains to rite ( ritus )\". In Roman juridical and religious usage, ritus was the proven way ( mos ) of doing something, or \"correct performance, custom\". The original concept of ritus may be related to the Sanskrit ṛtá (\"visible order)\" in Vedic religion , \"the lawful and regular order of the normal, and therefore proper, natural and true structure of cosmic, worldly, human and ritual events\". The word \"ritual\" is first recorded in English in 1570, and came into use in the 1600s to mean \"the prescribed order of performing religious services\" or more particularly a book of these prescriptions. \n\nThere are hardly any limits to the kind of actions that may be incorporated into a ritual. The rites of past and present societies have typically involved special gestures and words, recitation of fixed texts, performance of special music , songs or dances , processions, manipulation of certain objects, use of special dresses, consumption of special food , drink , or drugs , and much more. \n\nCatherine Bell argues that rituals can be characterized by formalism, traditionalism, invariance, rule-governance, sacral symbolism and performance. \n\nRitual uses a limited and rigidly organized set of expressions which anthropologists call a \"restricted code\" (in opposition to a more open \"elaborated code\"). Maurice Bloch argues that ritual obliges participants to use this formal oratorical style, which is limited in intonation, syntax, vocabulary, loudness, and fixity of order. In adopting this style, ritual leaders' speech becomes more style than content. Because this formal speech limits what can be said, it induces \"acceptance, compliance, or at least forbearance with regard to any overt challenge\". Bloch argues that this form of ritual communication makes rebellion impossible and revolution the only feasible alternative. Ritual tends to support traditional forms of social hierarchy and authority, and maintains the assumptions on which the authority is based from challenge. \n\nRituals appeal to tradition and are generally continued to repeat historical precedent, religious rite, mores , or ceremony accurately. Traditionalism varies from formalism in that the ritual may not be formal yet still makes an appeal to the historical trend. An example is the American Thanksgiving dinner, which may not be formal, yet is ostensibly based on an event from the early Puritan settlement of America. Historians Eric Hobsbawm and Terrence Ranger have argued that many of these are invented traditions , such as the rituals of the British monarchy, which invoke \"thousand year-old tradition\" but whose actual form originate in the late nineteenth century, to some extent reviving earlier forms, in this case medieval, that had been discontinued in the meantime. Thus, the appeal to history is important rather than accurate historical transmission. \n\nCatherine Bell states that ritual is also invariant, implying careful choreography. This is less an appeal to traditionalism than a striving for timeless repetition. The key to invariance is bodily discipline, as in monastic prayer and meditation meant to mold dispositions and moods. This bodily discipline is frequently performed in unison, by groups. \n\nRituals tend to be governed by rules, a feature somewhat like formalism. Rules impose norms on the chaos of behavior, either defining the outer limits of what is acceptable or choreographing each move. Individuals are held to communally approved customs that evoke a legitimate communal authority that can constrain the possible outcomes. Historically, war in most societies has been bound by highly ritualized constraints that limit the legitimate means by which war was waged. \n\nActivities appealing to supernatural beings are easily considered rituals, although the appeal may be quite indirect, expressing only a generalized belief in the existence of the sacred demanding a human response. National flags, for example, may be considered more than signs representing a country. The flag stands for larger symbols such as freedom, democracy, free enterprise or national superiority. Anthropologist Sherry Ortner writes that the flag:\n\ndoes not encourage reflection on the logical relations among these ideas, nor on the logical consequences of them as they are played out in social actuality, over time and history. On the contrary, the flag encourages a sort of all-or-nothing allegiance to the whole package, best summed [by] 'Our flag, love it or leave.' \n\nParticular objects become sacral symbols through a process of consecration which effectively creates the sacred by setting it apart from the profane . Boy Scouts and the armed forces in any country teach the official ways of folding, saluting and raising the flag, thus emphasizing that the flag should never be treated as just a piece of cloth. \n\nThe performance of ritual creates a theatrical -like frame around the activities, symbols and events that shape participant's experience and cognitive ordering of the world, simplifying the chaos of life and imposing a more or less coherent system of categories of meaning onto it. As Barbara Myerhoff put it, \"not only is seeing believing, doing is believing.\" [ ISBN missing ]\n\nThe theatricality of ritual may overlap with performance art . \n\nFor simplicity's sake, the range of diverse rituals can be divided into categories with common characteristics, generally falling into one three major categories:\n\nHowever, rituals can fall in more than one category or genre, and may be grouped in a variety of other ways. For example, the anthropologist Victor Turner writes:\n\nRituals may be seasonal, … or they may be contingent, held in response to an individual or collective crisis. … Other classes of rituals include divinatory rituals; ceremonies performed by political authorities to ensure the health and fertility of human beings, animals, and crops in their territories; initiation into priesthoods devoted to certain deities, into religious associations, or into secret societies; and those accompanying the daily offering of food and libations to deities or ancestral spirits or both.\n\nA rite of passage is a ritual event that marks a person's transition from one status to another, including adoption , baptism , coming of age , graduation , inauguration , engagement , and marriage . Rites of passage may also include initiation into groups not tied to a formal stage of life such as a fraternity . Arnold van Gennep stated that rites of passage are marked by three stages: \n\nAnthropologist Victor Turner defines rites of affliction actions that seek to mitigate spirits or supernatural forces that inflict humans with bad luck, illness, gynecological troubles, physical injuries, and other such misfortunes. These rites may include forms of spirit divination (consulting oracles ) to establish causes—and rituals that heal, purify, exorcise, and protect. The misfortune experienced may include individual health, but also broader climate-related issues such as drought or plagues of insects. Healing rites performed by shamans frequently identify social disorder as the cause, and make the restoration of social relationships the cure. \n\nTurner uses the example of the Isoma ritual among the Ndembu of northwestern Zambia to illustrate. The Isoma rite of affliction is used to cure a childless woman of infertility. Infertility is the result of a \"structural tension between matrilineal descent and virilocal marriage\" (i.e., the tension a woman feels between her mother's family, to whom she owes allegiance, and her husband's family among whom she must live). \"It is because the woman has come too closely in touch with the 'man's side' in her marriage that her dead matrikin have impaired her fertility.\" To correct the balance of matrilinial descent and marriage, the Isoma ritual dramatically placates the deceased spirits by requiring the woman to reside with her mother's kin. \n\nShamanic and other ritual may effect a psychotherapeutic cure, leading anthropologists such as Jane Atkinson to theorize how. Atkinson argues that the effectiveness of a shamanic ritual for an individual may depend upon a wider audiences acknowledging the shaman's power, which may lead to the shaman placing greater emphasis on engaging the audience than in the healing of the patient. \n\nMany cultures have rites associated with death and mourning, such as the last rites and wake in Christianity, shemira in Judaism, the antyesti in Hinduism, and the antam sanskar in Sikhism. These rituals often reflect deep spiritual beliefs and provide a structured way for communities to grieve and honor the deceased. In Tibetan Buddhism, for example, the rituals described in the Bardo Thodol guide the soul through the stages of death, aiming for spiritual liberation or enlightenment. In Islam, the Janazah prayer is an essential communal act that underscores the unity of the Muslim community in life and death. Indigenous cultures may have unique practices, such as the Australian Aboriginal smoking ceremony, intended to cleanse the spirit of the departed and ensure a safe journey to the afterlife .\n\nIn many traditions can be found the belief that when man was first made the creator bestowed soul upon him, while the earth provided the body. In Genesis is offered the following description of the creation of man: \"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul\". As a result at the moment of death each of the two elements needs to be returned to its source, the body returns to earth, while the soul to the heavenly creator, by means of the funerary ritual. \n\nCalendrical and commemorative rites are ritual events marking particular times of year, or a fixed period since an important event. Calendrical rituals give social meaning to the passage of time, creating repetitive weekly, monthly or yearly cycles. Some rites are oriented towards a culturally defined moment of change in the climatic cycle, such as solar terms or the changing of seasons, or they may mark the inauguration of an activity such as planting, harvesting, or moving from winter to summer pasture during the agricultural cycle . They may be fixed by the solar or lunar calendar ; those fixed by the solar calendar fall on the same day (of the Gregorian, Solar calendar) each year (such as New Year's Day on the first of January) while those calculated by the lunar calendar fall on different dates (of the Gregorian, Solar calendar) each year (such as Chinese lunar New Year ). Calendrical rites impose a cultural order on nature. Mircea Eliade states that the calendrical rituals of many religious traditions recall and commemorate the basic beliefs of a community, and their yearly celebration establishes a link between past and present, as if the original events are happening over again: \"Thus the gods did; thus men do.\" \n\nThis genre of ritual encompasses forms of sacrifice and offering meant to praise, please or placate divine powers. According to early anthropologist Edward Tylor, such sacrifices are gifts given in hope of a return. Catherine Bell , however, points out that sacrifice covers a range of practices from those that are manipulative and \"magical\" to those of pure devotion. Hindu puja , for example, appear to have no other purpose than to please the deity. \n\nAccording to Marcel Mauss , sacrifice is distinguished from other forms of offering by being consecrated, and hence sanctified. As a consequence, the offering is usually destroyed in the ritual to transfer it to the deities.\n\nRites of feasting and fasting are those through which a community publicly expresses an adherence to basic, shared religious values, rather than to the overt presence of deities as is found in rites of affliction where feasting or fasting may also take place. It encompasses a range of performances such as communal fasting during Ramadan by Muslims; the slaughter of pigs in New Guinea; Carnival festivities; or penitential processions in Catholicism. Victor Turner described this \"cultural performance\" of basic values a \"social drama\". Such dramas allow the social stresses that are inherent in a particular culture to be expressed and worked out symbolically in a ritual catharsis; as the social tensions continue to persist outside the ritual, pressure mounts for the ritual's cyclical performance. In Carnival, for example, the practice of masking allows people to be what they are not, and acts as a general social leveller, erasing otherwise tense social hierarchies in a festival that emphasizes play outside the bounds of normal social limits. Yet outside carnival, social tensions of race, class and gender persist, hence requiring the repeated periodic release found in the festival. \n\nA water rite is a rite or ceremonial custom that uses water as its central feature. Typically, a person is immersed or bathed as a symbol of religious indoctrination or ritual purification . Examples include the Mikveh in Judaism , a custom of purification; misogi in Shinto , a custom of spiritual and bodily purification involving bathing in a sacred waterfall, river, or lake; the Muslim ritual ablution or Wudu before prayer; baptism in Christianity , a custom and sacrament that represents both purification and initiation into the religious community (the Christian Church ); and Amrit Sanskar in Sikhism , a rite of passage ( sanskar ) that similarly represents purification and initiation into the religious community (the khalsa ). Rites that use water are not considered water rites if it is not their central feature. For example, having water to drink during or after ritual is common, but does not make that ritual a water ritual unless the drinking of water is a central activity such as in the Church of All Worlds waterkin rite.\n\nAccording to anthropologist Clifford Geertz , political rituals actually construct power; that is, in his analysis of the Balinese state , he argued that rituals are not an ornament of political power, but that the power of political actors depends upon their ability to create rituals and the cosmic framework within which the social hierarchy headed by the king is perceived as natural and sacred. As a \"dramaturgy of power\" comprehensive ritual systems may create a cosmological order that sets a ruler apart as a divine being , as in \"the divine right\" of European kings, or the divine Japanese Emperor. Political rituals also emerge in the form of uncodified or codified conventions practiced by political officials that cement respect for the arrangements of an institution or role against the individual temporarily assuming it, as can be seen in the many rituals still observed within the procedure of parliamentary bodies.\n\nRitual can be used as a form of resistance, as for example, in the various Cargo Cults that developed against colonial powers in the South Pacific. In such religio-political movements, Islanders would use ritual imitations of western practices (such as the building of landing strips) as a means of summoning cargo (manufactured goods) from the ancestors. Leaders of these groups characterized the present state (often imposed by colonial capitalist regimes) as a dismantling of the old social order, which they sought to restore. Rituals may also attain political significance after conflict, as is the case with the Bosnian syncretic holidays and festivals that transgress religious boundaries. \n\nNineteenth century \" armchair anthropologists \" were concerned with the basic question of how religion originated in human history. In the twentieth century their conjectural histories were replaced with new concerns around the question of what these beliefs and practices did for societies, regardless of their origin. In this view, religion was a universal, and while its content might vary enormously, it served certain basic functions such as the provision of prescribed solutions to basic human psychological and social problems, as well as expressing the central values of a society. Bronislaw Malinowski used the concept of function to address questions of individual psychological needs; A.R. Radcliffe-Brown , in contrast, looked for the function (purpose) of the institution or custom in preserving or maintaining society as a whole. They thus disagreed about the relationship of anxiety to ritual. \n\nMalinowski argued that ritual was a non-technical means of addressing anxiety about activities where dangerous elements were beyond technical control: \"magic is to be expected and generally to be found whenever man comes to an unbridgeable gap, a hiatus in his knowledge or in his powers of practical control, and yet has to continue in his pursuit.\" Radcliffe-Brown in contrast, saw ritual as an expression of common interest symbolically representing a community, and that anxiety was felt only if the ritual was not performed. George C. Homans sought to resolve these opposing theories by differentiating between \"primary anxieties\" felt by people who lack the techniques to secure results, and \"secondary (or displaced) anxiety\" felt by those who have not performed the rites meant to allay primary anxiety correctly. Homans argued that purification rituals may then be conducted to dispel secondary anxiety. \n\nA.R. Radcliffe-Brown argued that ritual should be distinguished from technical action, viewing it as a structured event: \"ritual acts differ from technical acts in having in all instances some expressive or symbolic element in them.\" Edmund Leach , in contrast, saw ritual and technical action less as separate structural types of activity and more as a spectrum: \"Actions fall into place on a continuous scale. At one extreme we have actions which are entirely profane, entirely functional, technique pure and simple; at the other we have actions which are entirely sacred, strictly aesthetic, technically non-functional. Between these two extremes we have the great majority of social actions which partake partly of the one sphere and partly of the other. From this point of view technique and ritual, profane and sacred, do not denote types of action but aspects of almost any kind of action.\" \n\nThe functionalist model viewed ritual as a homeostatic mechanism to regulate and stabilize social institutions by adjusting social interactions , maintaining a group ethos , and restoring harmony after disputes.\n\nAlthough the functionalist model was soon superseded, later \"neofunctional\" theorists adopted its approach by examining the ways that ritual regulated larger ecological systems. Roy Rappaport , for example, examined the way gift exchanges of pigs between tribal groups in Papua New Guinea maintained environmental balance between humans, available food (with pigs sharing the same foodstuffs as humans) and resource base. Rappaport concluded that ritual, \"...helps to maintain an undegraded environment, limits fighting to frequencies which do not endanger the existence of regional population, adjusts man-land ratios, facilitates trade, distributes local surpluses of pig throughout the regional population in the form of pork, and assures people of high quality protein when they are most in need of it\". Similarly, J. Stephen Lansing traced how the intricate calendar of Hindu Balinese rituals served to regulate the vast irrigation systems of Bali, ensuring the optimum distribution of water over the system while limiting disputes. \n\nWhile most Functionalists sought to link ritual to the maintenance of social order, South African functionalist anthropologist Max Gluckman coined the phrase \"rituals of rebellion\" to describe a type of ritual in which the accepted social order was symbolically turned on its head. Gluckman argued that the ritual was an expression of underlying social tensions (an idea taken up by Victor Turner ), and that it functioned as an institutional pressure valve, relieving those tensions through these cyclical performances. The rites ultimately functioned to reinforce social order, insofar as they allowed those tensions to be expressed without leading to actual rebellion. Carnival is viewed in the same light. He observed, for example, how the first-fruits festival ( incwala ) of the South African Bantu kingdom of Swaziland symbolically inverted the normal social order, so that the king was publicly insulted, women asserted their domination over men, and the established authority of elders over the young was turned upside down. \n\nClaude Lévi-Strauss , the French anthropologist, regarded all social and cultural organization as symbolic systems of communication shaped by the inherent structure of the human brain. He therefore argued that the symbol systems are not reflections of social structure as the Functionalists believed, but are imposed on social relations to organize them. Lévi-Strauss thus viewed myth and ritual as complementary symbol systems, one verbal, one non-verbal. Lévi-Strauss was not concerned to develop a theory of ritual (although he did produce a four-volume analysis of myth) but was influential to later scholars of ritual such as Mary Douglas and Edmund Leach . \n\nVictor Turner combined Arnold van Gennep 's model of the structure of initiation rites, and Gluckman's functionalist emphasis on the ritualization of social conflict to maintain social equilibrium, with a more structural model of symbols in ritual. Running counter to this emphasis on structured symbolic oppositions within a ritual was his exploration of the liminal phase of rites of passage, a phase in which \"anti-structure\" appears. In this phase, opposed states such as birth and death may be encompassed by a single act, object or phrase. The dynamic nature of symbols experienced in ritual provides a compelling personal experience; ritual is a \"mechanism that periodically converts the obligatory into the desirable\". \n\nMary Douglas , a British Functionalist, extended Turner's theory of ritual structure and anti-structure with her own contrasting set of terms \"grid\" and \"group\" in the book Natural Symbols . Drawing on Levi-Strauss' Structuralist approach, she saw ritual as symbolic communication that constrained social behaviour. Grid is a scale referring to the degree to which a symbolic system is a shared frame of reference. Group refers to the degree people are tied into a tightly knit community. When graphed on two intersecting axes, four quadrants are possible: strong group/strong grid, strong group/weak grid, weak group/weak grid, weak group/strong grid. Douglas argued that societies with strong group or strong grid were marked by more ritual activity than those weak in either group or grid. (see also, section below )\n\nIn his analysis of rites of passage , Victor Turner argued that the liminal phase - that period 'betwixt and between' - was marked by \"two models of human interrelatedness, juxtaposed and alternating\": structure and anti-structure (or communitas ). While the ritual clearly articulated the cultural ideals of a society through ritual symbolism, the unrestrained festivities of the liminal period served to break down social barriers and to join the group into an undifferentiated unity with \"no status, property, insignia, secular clothing, rank, kinship position, nothing to demarcate themselves from their fellows\". These periods of symbolic inversion have been studied in a diverse range of rituals such as pilgrimages and Yom Kippur . \n\nBeginning with Max Gluckman's concept of \"rituals of rebellion\", Victor Turner argued that many types of ritual also served as \"social dramas\" through which structural social tensions could be expressed, and temporarily resolved. Drawing on Van Gennep's model of initiation rites, Turner viewed these social dramas as a dynamic process through which the community renewed itself through the ritual creation of communitas during the \"liminal phase\". Turner analyzed the ritual events in 4 stages: breach in relations, crisis, redressive actions, and acts of reintegration. Like Gluckman, he argued these rituals maintain social order while facilitating disordered inversions, thereby moving people to a new status, just as in an initiation rite. \n\nArguments, melodies, formulas, maps and pictures are not idealities to be stared at but texts to be read; so are rituals, palaces, technologies, and social formations.\n\nClifford Geertz also expanded on the symbolic approach to ritual that began with Victor Turner. Geertz argued that religious symbol systems provided both a \"model of\" reality (showing how to interpret the world as is) as well as a \"model for\" reality (clarifying its ideal state). The role of ritual, according to Geertz, is to bring these two aspects – the \"model of\" and the \"model for\" – together: \"it is in ritual – that is consecrated behaviour – that this conviction that religious conceptions are veridical and that religious directives are sound is somehow generated.\" \n\nSymbolic anthropologists like Geertz analyzed rituals as language-like codes to be interpreted independently as cultural systems. Geertz rejected Functionalist arguments that ritual describes social order, arguing instead that ritual actively shapes that social order and imposes meaning on disordered experience. He also differed from Gluckman and Turner's emphasis on ritual action as a means of resolving social passion, arguing instead that it simply displayed them. \n\nWhereas Victor Turner saw in ritual the potential to release people from the binding structures of their lives into a liberating anti-structure or communitas, Maurice Bloch argued that ritual produced conformity. \n\nMaurice Bloch argued that ritual communication is unusual in that it uses a special, restricted vocabulary, a small number of permissible illustrations, and a restrictive grammar. As a result, ritual utterances become very predictable, and the speaker is made anonymous in that they have little choice in what to say. The restrictive syntax reduces the ability of the speaker to make propositional arguments, and they are left, instead, with utterances that cannot be contradicted such as \"I do thee wed\" in a wedding. These kinds of utterances, known as performatives , prevent speakers from making political arguments through logical argument, and are typical of what Weber called traditional authority instead. \n\nBloch's model of ritual language denies the possibility of creativity. Thomas Csordas, in contrast, analyzes how ritual language can be used to innovate. Csordas looks at groups of rituals that share performative elements (\"genres\" of ritual with a shared \"poetics\"). These rituals may fall along the spectrum of formality, with some less, others more formal and restrictive. Csordas argues that innovations may be introduced in less formalized rituals. As these innovations become more accepted and standardized, they are slowly adopted in more formal rituals. In this way, even the most formal of rituals are potential avenues for creative expression. \n\nIn his historical analysis of articles on ritual and rite in the Encyclopædia Britannica , Talal Asad notes that from 1771 to 1852, the brief articles on ritual define it as a \"book directing the order and manner to be observed in performing divine service\" (i.e., as a script). There are no articles on the subject thereafter until 1910, when a new, lengthy article appeared that redefines ritual as \"...a type of routine behaviour that symbolizes or expresses something\". As a symbolic activity, it is no longer confined to religion, but is distinguished from technical action. The shift in definitions from script to behavior, which is likened to a text, is matched by a semantic distinction between ritual as an outward sign (i.e., public symbol) and inward meaning . \n\nThe emphasis has changed to establishing the meaning of public symbols and abandoning concerns with inner emotional states since, as Evans-Pritchard wrote \"such emotional states, if present at all, must vary not only from individual to individual, but also in the same individual on different occasions and even at different points in the same rite.\" Asad, in contrast, emphasizes behavior and inner emotional states; rituals are to be performed, and mastering these performances is a skill requiring disciplined action.\n\nIn other words, apt performance involves not symbols to be interpreted but abilities to be acquired according to rules that are sanctioned by those in authority: it presupposes no obscure meanings, but rather the formation of physical and linguistic skills.\n\nDrawing on the example of Medieval monastic life in Europe, he points out that ritual in this case refers to its original meaning of the \"...book directing the order and manner to be observed in performing divine service\". This book \"prescribed practices, whether they had to do with the proper ways of eating, sleeping, working, and praying or with proper moral dispositions and spiritual aptitudes, aimed at developing virtues that are put 'to the service of God. ' \" Monks, in other words, were disciplined in the Foucauldian sense . The point of monastic discipline was to learn skills and appropriate emotions. Asad contrasts his approach by concluding:\n\nSymbols call for interpretation, and even as interpretive criteria are extended so interpretations can be multiplied. Disciplinary practices, on the other hand, cannot be varied so easily, because learning to develop moral capabilities is not the same thing as learning to invent representations.\n\nEthnographic observation shows ritual can create social solidarity. Douglas Foley Went to North Town, Texas, between 1973 and 1974 to study public high school culture. He used interviews, participant observation, and unstructured chatting to study racial tension and capitalist culture in his ethnography Learning Capitalist Culture . Foley refers to football games and Friday Night Lights as a community ritual. This ritual united the school and created a sense of solidarity and community on a weekly basis involving pep rallies and the game itself. Foley observed judgement and segregation based on class, social status, wealth, and gender. He described Friday Night Lights as a ritual that overcomes those differences: \"The other, gentler, more social side of football was, of course, the emphasis on camaraderie, loyalty, friendship between players, and pulling together\". In his ethnography Waiting for Elijah: Time and Encounter in a Bosnian Landscape , anthropologist Safet HadžiMuhamedović suggests that shared festivals like St George's Day and St Elijah's Day structure interfaith relationships and appear as acts of solidarity against ethno-nationalist purifications of territory in Bosnia . \n\nAsad's work critiqued the notion that there were universal characteristics of ritual to be found in all cases. Catherine Bell has extended this idea by shifting attention from ritual as a category, to the processes of \"ritualization\" by which ritual is created as a cultural form in a society. Ritualization is \"a way of acting that is designed and orchestrated to distinguish and privilege what is being done in comparison to other, usually more quotidian, activities\". \n\nAnthropologists have also analyzed ritual via insights from other behavioral sciences. The idea that cultural rituals share behavioral similarities with personal rituals of individuals was discussed early on by Freud. Dulaney and Fiske compared ethnographic descriptions of both rituals and non-ritual doings, such as work to behavioral descriptions from clinical descriptions of obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). They note that OCD behavior often consists of such behavior as constantly cleaning objects, concern or disgust with bodily waste or secretions, repetitive actions to prevent harm, heavy emphasis on number or order of actions etc. They then show that ethnographic descriptions of cultural rituals contain around 5 times more of such content than ethnographic descriptions of other activities such as \"work\". Fiske later repeated similar analysis with more descriptions from a larger collection of different cultures, also contrasting descriptions of cultural rituals to descriptions of other behavioral disorders (in addition to OCD), in order to show that only OCD-like behavior (not other illnesses) shares properties with rituals. The authors offer tentative explanations for these findings, for example that these behavioral traits are widely needed for survival, to control risk, and cultural rituals are often performed in the context of perceived collective risk.\n\nOther anthropologists have taken these insights further, and constructed more elaborate theories based on the brain functions and physiology. Liénard and Boyer suggest that commonalities between obsessive behavior in individuals and similar behavior in collective contexts possibly share similarities due to underlying mental processes they call hazard precaution. They suggest that individuals of societies seem to pay more attention to information relevant to avoiding hazards, which in turn can explain why collective rituals displaying actions of hazard precaution are so popular and prevail for long periods in cultural transmission. \n\nAccording to the sociologist Mervin Verbit , ritual may be understood as one of the key components of religiosity. And ritual itself may be broken down into four dimensions; content, frequency, intensity\nand centrality. The content of a ritual may vary from ritual to ritual, as does the frequency of its practice, the intensity of the ritual (how much of an impact it has on the practitioner), and the centrality of the ritual (in that religious tradition). \n\nIn this sense, ritual is similar to Charles Glock 's \"practice\" dimension of religiosity. \n\nIn religion , a ritual can comprise the prescribed outward forms of performing the cultus , or cult , of a particular observation within a religion or religious denomination . Although ritual is often used in context with worship performed in a church, the actual relationship between any religion's doctrine and its ritual(s) can vary considerably from organized religion to non-institutionalized spirituality, such as ayahuasca shamanism as practiced by the Urarina of the upper Amazon . Rituals often have a close connection with reverence , thus a ritual in many cases expresses reverence for a deity or idealized state of humanity.\n\nIn Christianity, a rite is used to refer to a sacred ceremony (such as anointing of the sick ), which may or may not carry the status of a sacrament depending on the Christian denomination (in Roman Catholicism, anointing of the sick is a sacrament while in Lutheranism it is not). The word \"rite\" is also used to denote a liturgical tradition usually emanating from a specific center; examples include the Roman Rite , the Byzantine Rite , and the Sarum Rite . Such rites may include various sub-rites. For example, the Byzantine Rite (which is used by the Eastern Orthodox , Eastern Lutheran , and Eastern Catholic churches) has Greek, Russian, and other ethnically based variants.\n\nFor daily prayers , practicing Muslims must perform a ritual recitation from the Quran in Arabic while bowing and prostrating . Quranic chapter 2 prescribes rituals such as the direction to face for prayers ( qiblah ); pilgrimage ( Hajj ), and fasting in Ramadan . Iḥrām is a state of ritual purity in preparation for pilgrimage in Islam . \n\nHajj rituals include circumambulation around the Kaʿbah . ... and show us our rites - these rites ( manāsik ) are presumed the rituals of ḥajj. Truly Ṣafā and Marwah are among the rituals of God Saʿy is the ritual travel, partway between walking and running, seven times between the two hills. \n\nIn Freemasonry , rituals are scripted words and actions which employ Masonic symbolism to illustrate the principles espoused by Freemasons . These rituals are progressively taught to entrusted members during initiation into a particular Masonic rite comprising a series of degrees conferred by a Masonic body . The degrees of Freemasonry derive from the three grades of medieval craft guilds ; those of \"Entered Apprentice\", \"Journeyman\" (or \"Fellowcraft\"), and \"Master Mason\". In North America , Freemasons who have been raised to the degree of \"Master Mason\" have the option of joining appendant bodies that offer additional degrees to those, such as those of the Scottish Rite or the York Rite .",
  "Samkhya or Sankhya ( / ˈ s ɑː ŋ k j ə / ; Sanskrit : सांख्य , romanized : sāṃkhya ) is a dualistic orthodox school of Hindu philosophy . It views reality as composed of two independent principles, Puruṣa (' consciousness ' or spirit) and Prakṛti (nature or matter, including the human mind and emotions). \n\nPuruṣa is the witness-consciousness. It is absolute, independent, free, beyond perception, above any experience by mind or senses, and impossible to describe in words. \n\nPrakriti is matter or nature. It is inactive, unconscious, and is a balance of the three guṇas (qualities or innate tendencies), namely sattva , rajas , and tamas . When Prakṛti comes into contact with Purusha this balance is disturbed, and Prakriti becomes manifest, evolving twenty-three tattvas , namely intellect ( buddhi , mahat ), I-principle ( ahamkara ), mind ( manas ); the five sensory capacities known as ears, skin, eyes, tongue and nose; the five action capacities known as hands (hasta), feet (pada), speech (vak), anus (guda), and genitals (upastha); and the five \"subtle elements\" or \"modes of sensory content\" ( tanmatras ), from which the five \"gross elements\" or \"forms of perceptual objects\" (earth, water, fire, air and space) emerge, in turn giving rise to the manifestation of sensory experience and cognition. \n\nJiva ('a living being') is the state in which Puruṣa is bonded to Prakriti . Human experience is an interplay of the two, Puruṣa being conscious of the various combinations of cognitive activities. The end of the bondage of Puruṣa to Prakriti is called Moksha (Liberation) or Kaivalya (Isolation). \n\nSamkhya's epistemology accepts three of six pramaṇas ('proofs') as the only reliable means of gaining knowledge, as does yoga . These are pratyakṣa (' perception '), anumāṇa (' inference ') and śabda ( āptavacana , meaning, 'word/testimony of reliable sources'). Sometimes described as one of the rationalist schools of Indian philosophy , it relies exclusively on reason. \n\nWhile Samkhya-like speculations can be found in the Rig Veda and some of the older Upanishads, some western scholars have proposed that Samkhya may have non-Vedic origins, [ note 1 ] developing in ascetic milieus. Proto-Samkhya ideas developed c. 8th/7th BC and onwards, as evidenced in the middle Upanishads, the Buddhacharita , the Bhagavad Gita , and the Mokshadharma -section of the Mahabharata . It was related to the early ascetic traditions and meditation, spiritual practices, and religious cosmology, and methods of reasoning that result in liberating knowledge ( vidya , jnana , viveka ) that end the cycle of duḥkha (suffering) and rebirth allowing for \"a great variety of philosophical formulations\". Pre- Karika systematic Samkhya existed around the beginning of the first millennium CE. The defining method of Samkhya was established with the Samkhyakarika (4th c. CE).\n\nSamkhya might have been theistic or nontheistic, but with its classical systematization in the early first millennium CE, the existence of a deity became irrelevant. Samkhya is strongly related to the Yoga school of Hinduism , for which it forms the theoretical foundation, and it has influenced other schools of Indian philosophy. \n\n\"Samkhya is not one of the systems of Indian philosophy. Samkhya is the philosophy of India!\"\n\nSāṃkhya (सांख्य) or sāṅkhya , also transliterated as samkhya and sankhya , respectively, is a Sanskrit word that, depending on the context, means 'to reckon, count, enumerate, calculate, deliberate, reason, reasoning by numeric enumeration, relating to number, rational'. In the context of ancient Indian philosophies, Samkhya refers to the philosophical school in Hinduism based on systematic enumeration and rational examination. \n\nThe word samkhya means 'empirical' or 'relating to numbers'. Although the term had been used in the general sense of metaphysical knowledge before, in technical usage it refers to the Samkhya school of thought that evolved into a cohesive philosophical system in early centuries CE. The Samkhya system is called so because 'it \"enumerates'\" twenty five Tattvas or true principles; and its chief object is to effect the final emancipation of the twenty-fifth Tattva, i.e. the puruṣa or soul'. \n\nSamkhya makes a distinction between two \"irreducible, innate and independent realities\", Purusha , the witness-consciousness, and Prakṛti , \"matter\", the activities of mind and perception. According to Dan Lusthaus,\n\nIn Sāṃkhya puruṣa signifies the observer, the 'witness'. Prakṛti includes all the cognitive, moral, psychological, emotional, sensorial and physical aspects of reality. It is often mistranslated as 'matter' or 'nature' – in non-Sāṃkhyan usage it does mean 'essential nature' – but that distracts from the heavy Sāṃkhyan stress on prakṛti's cognitive, mental, psychological and sensorial activities. Moreover, subtle and gross matter are its most derivative byproducts, not its core. Only prakṛti acts. \n\nPuruṣa is considered as the conscious principle, a passive enjoyer ( bhokta ) and the Prakṛti is the enjoyed ( bhogya ). Samkhya believes that the puruṣa cannot be regarded as the source of inanimate world, because an intelligent principle cannot transform itself into the unconscious world. It is a pluralistic spiritualism, atheistic realism and uncompromising dualism. \n\nPuruṣa is the witness-consciousness. It is absolute, independent, free, imperceptible, unknowable through other agencies, above any experience by mind or senses and beyond any words or explanations. It remains pure, \"nonattributive consciousness\". Puruṣa is neither produced nor does it produce. No appellations can qualify Purusha , nor can it be substantialized or objectified. It \"cannot be reduced, can't be 'settled'\". Any designation of Purusha comes from Prakriti , and is a limitation. Unlike Advaita Vedanta , and like Purva-Mīmāṃsā , Samkhya believes in plurality of the Puruṣas . However, while being multiple, Puruṣas are considered non-different because their essential attributes are the same. \n\nPrakṛti is the first cause of the world of our experiences. Since it is the first principle ( tattva ) of the universe, it is called the pradhāna (chief principle), but, as it is the unconscious and unintelligent principle, it is also called the jaḍa (unintelligent). It is composed of three essential characteristics ( triguna s). These are:\n\nUnmanifested Prakriti is infinite, inactive, and unconscious, with the three gunas in a state of equilibrium. When this equilibrium of the guṇas is disturbed then unmanifest Prakṛti , along with the omnipresent witness-consciousness, Purusha , gives rise to the manifest world of experience. Prakriti becomes manifest as twenty-three tattvas : intellect ( buddhi , mahat), ego ( ahamkara ) mind ( manas ); the five sensory capacities; the five action capacities; and the five \"subtle elements\" or \"modes of sensory content\" ( tanmatras : form ( rūpa ), sound ( shabda ), smell ( gandha ), taste ( rasa ), touch ( sparsha )), from which the five \"gross elements\" or \"forms of perceptual objects\" emerge (earth (prithivi), water (jala), fire (Agni), air (Vāyu), ether (Ākāsha)). Prakriti is the source of our experience; it is not \"the evolution of a series of material entities,\" but \"the emergence of experience itself\". It is description of experience and the relations between its elements, not an explanation of the origin of the universe. \n\nAll Prakriti has these three guṇas in different proportions. Each guṇa is dominant at specific times of day. The interplay of these guṇa defines the character of someone or something, of nature and determines the progress of life. The Samkhya theory of guṇa was widely discussed, developed and refined by various schools of Indian philosophies. Samkhya's philosophical treatises also influenced the development of various theories of Hindu ethics. \n\nThought processes and mental events are conscious only to the extent they receive illumination from Purusha . In Samkhya, consciousness is compared to light which illuminates the material configurations or 'shapes' assumed by the mind. So intellect, after receiving cognitive structures from the mind and illumination from pure consciousness, creates thought structures that appear to be conscious. Ahamkara, the ego or the phenomenal self, appropriates all mental experiences to itself and thus, personalizes the objective activities of mind and intellect by assuming possession of them. But consciousness is itself independent of the thought structures it illuminates. \n\nThe Supreme Good is mokṣa which consists in the permanent impossibility of the incidence of pain... in the realisation of the Self as Self pure and simple.\n\nSamkhya school considers moksha as a natural quest of every jiva. The Samkhyakarika states,\n\nAs the unconscious milk functions for the sake of nourishment of the calf, so the Prakriti functions for the sake of moksha of the spirit.\n\nSamkhya regards ignorance ( avidyā ) as the root cause of suffering and bondage ( Samsara ). Samkhya states that the way out of this suffering is through knowledge (viveka). Mokṣa (liberation), states Samkhya school, results from knowing the difference between Prakṛti (avyakta-vyakta) and Puruṣa (jña). More specifically, the Puruṣa that has attained liberation is to be distinguished from a Puruṣa that is still bound on account of the liberated Puruṣa being free from its subtle body (synonymous with buddhi), in which is located the mental dispositions that individuates it and causes it to experience bondage. : 58\n\nPuruṣa , the eternal pure consciousness, due to ignorance, identifies itself with products of Prakṛti such as intellect (buddhi) and ego (ahamkara). This results in endless transmigration and suffering. However, once the realization arises that Puruṣa is distinct from Prakṛti , is more than empirical ego, and that puruṣa is deepest conscious self within, the Self gains isolation ( kaivalya ) and freedom ( moksha ). \n\nThough in conventional terms the bondage is ascribed to the Puruṣa , this is ultimately a mistake. This is because the Samkhya school (Samkhya karika Verse 63) maintains that it is actually Prakriti that binds itself, and thus bondage should in reality be ascribed to Prakriti , not to the Puruṣa : \n\nBy seven modes nature binds herself by herself: by one, she releases (herself), for the soul's wish (Samkhya karika Verse 63) ·\n\nVacaspati gave a metaphorical example to elaborate the position that the Puruṣa is only mistakenly ascribed bondage: although the king is ascribed victory or defeat, it is actually the soldiers that experience it. It is then not merely that bondage is only mistakenly ascribed to the Puruṣa , but that liberation is like bondage, wrongly ascribed to the Puruṣa and should be ascribed to Prakriti alone. : 60\n\nOther forms of Samkhya teach that Mokṣa is attained by one's own development of the higher faculties of discrimination achieved by meditation and other yogic practices. Moksha is described by Samkhya scholars as a state of liberation, where sattva guṇa predominates. \n\nSamkhya considered Pratyakṣa or Dṛṣṭam (direct sense perception), Anumāna (inference), and Śabda or Āptavacana (verbal testimony of the sages or shāstras) to be the only valid means of knowledge or pramana . Unlike some other schools, Samkhya did not consider the following three pramanas to be epistemically proper: Upamāṇa (comparison and analogy), Arthāpatti (postulation, deriving from circumstances) or Anupalabdi (non-perception, negative/cognitive proof). \n\nThe Samkhya system is based on Sat-kārya-vāda or the theory of causation. According to Satkāryavāda, the effect is pre-existent in the cause. There is only an apparent or illusory change in the makeup of the cause and not a material one, when it becomes effect. Since, effects cannot come from nothing, the original cause or ground of everything is seen as Prakṛti . \n\nMore specifically, Samkhya system follows the prakṛti-Parināma Vāda . Parināma denotes that the effect is a real transformation of the cause. The cause under consideration here is Prakṛti or more precisely Moola-Prakṛti (\"Primordial Matter\"). The Samkhya system is therefore an exponent of an evolutionary theory of matter beginning with primordial matter. In evolution, Prakṛti is transformed and differentiated into multiplicity of objects. Evolution is followed by dissolution. In dissolution the physical existence, all the worldly objects mingle back into Prakṛti , which now remains as the undifferentiated, primordial substance. This is how the cycles of evolution and dissolution follow each other. But this theory is very different from the modern theories of science in the sense that Prakṛti evolves for each Jiva separately, giving individual bodies and minds to each and after liberation these elements of Prakṛti merges into the Moola-Prakṛti . Another uniqueness of Sāmkhya is that not only physical entities but even mind, ego and intelligence are regarded as forms of Unconsciousness, quite distinct from pure consciousness.\n\nSamkhya theorizes that Prakṛti is the source of the perceived world of becoming. It is pure potentiality that evolves itself successively into twenty four tattvas or principles. The evolution itself is possible because Prakṛti is always in a state of tension among its constituent strands or gunas – sattva , rajas and tamas . In a state of equilibrium of three gunas, when the three together are one, \"unmanifest\" Prakṛti which is unknowable. A guṇa is an entity that can change, either increase or decrease, therefore, pure consciousness is called nirguna or without any modification.\n\nThe evolution obeys causality relationships, with primal Nature itself being the material cause of all physical creation. The cause and effect theory of Samkhya is called \" Satkārya-vāda \" (\"theory of existent causes\"), and holds that nothing can really be created from or destroyed into nothingness – all evolution is simply the transformation of primal Nature from one form to another.\n\nSamkhya cosmology describes how life emerges in the universe; the relationship between Purusha and Prakṛti is crucial to Patanjali 's yoga system. The strands of Samkhya thought can be traced back to the Vedic speculation of creation. It is also frequently mentioned in the Mahabharata and Yogavasishta .\n\nLarson (1969) discerns four basic periods in the development of Samkhya: \n\nLarson (1987) discerns three phases of development of the term samkhya , relating to three different meanings: \n\nIn the beginning this was Self alone, in the shape of a person (puruṣa). He looking around saw nothing but his Self ( Atman ). He first said, \"This is I\", therefore he became I by name.\n\nThe early, speculative phase took place in the first half of the first millennium BCE, when ascetic spirituality and monastic ( sramana and yati ) traditions came into vogue in India, and ancient scholars combined \"enumerated set[s] of principles\" with \"a methodology of reasoning that results in spiritual knowledge ( vidya, jnana, viveka ).\" These early non-Samkhya speculations and proto-Samkhya ideas are visible in earlier Hindu scriptures such as the Vedas, [ note 3 ] early Upanishads such as the Chandogya Upanishad , [ note 4 ] and the Bhagavad Gita . However, these early speculations and proto-Samkhya ideas had not distilled and congealed into a distinct, complete philosophy. \n\nWhile some earlier scholars have argued for Upanishadic origins of the Samkhya-tradition, [ note 4 ] and the Upanisads contain dualistic speculations which may have influenced proto-samkhya, other scholars have noted the dissimilarities of Samkhya with the Vedic tradition. As early as 1898, Richard Karl von Garbe , a German professor of philosophy and Indologist, wrote in 1898,\n\nThe origin of the Sankhya system appears in the proper light only when we understand that in those regions of India which were little influenced by Brahmanism [political connotation given by the Christian missionary] the first attempt had been made to solve the riddles of the world and of our existence merely by means of reason. For the Sankhya philosophy is, in its essence, not only atheistic but also inimical to the Veda'. \n\nDandekar , similarly wrote in 1968, 'The origin of the Sankhya is to be traced to the pre-Vedic non-Aryan thought complex'. Heinrich Zimmer states that Samkhya has non-Aryan origins. [ note 1 ]\n\nAnthony Warder (1994; first ed. 1967) writes that the Samkhya and Mīmāṃsā schools appear to have been established before the Sramana traditions in India ( c. 500 BCE), and he finds that \"Samkhya represents a relatively free development of speculation among the Brahmans, independent of the Vedic revelation.\" Warder writes, '[Samkhya] has indeed been suggested to be non-Brahmanical and even anti-Vedic in origin, but there is no tangible evidence for that except that it is very different than most Vedic speculation – but that is (itself) quite inconclusive. Speculations in the direction of the Samkhya can be found in the early Upanishads.\" \n\nAccording to Ruzsa in 2006, \"Sāṅkhya has a very long history. Its roots go deeper than textual traditions allow us to see,\" stating that \"Sāṅkhya likely grew out of speculations rooted in cosmic dualism and introspective meditational practice.\" The dualism is rooted in agricultural concepts of the union of the male sky-god and the female earth-goddess, the union of \"the spiritual, immaterial, lordly, immobile fertilizer (represented as the Śiva-liṅgam, or phallus) and of the active, fertile, powerful but subservient material principle (Śakti or Power, often as the horrible Dark Lady, Kālī).\" In contrast,\n\nThe ascetic and meditative yoga practice, in contrast, aimed at overcoming the limitations of the natural body and achieving perfect stillness of the mind. A combination of these views may have resulted in the concept of the Puruṣa , the unchanging immaterial conscious essence, contrasted with Prakṛti , the material principle that produces not only the external world and the body but also the changing and externally determined aspects of the human mind (such as the intellect, ego, internal and external perceptual organs). \n\nAccording to Ruzsa,\n\nBoth the agrarian theology of Śiva-Śakti/Sky-Earth and the tradition of yoga (meditation) do not appear to be rooted in the Vedas. Not surprisingly, classical Sāṅkhya is remarkably independent of orthodox Brahmanic traditions, including the Vedas. Sāṅkhya is silent about the Vedas, about their guardians (the Brahmins) and for that matter about the whole caste system, and about the Vedic gods; and it is slightly unfavorable towards the animal sacrifices that characterized the ancient Vedic religion. But all our early sources for the history of Sāṅkhya belong to the Vedic tradition, and it is thus reasonable to suppose that we do not see in them the full development of the Sāṅkhya system, but rather occasional glimpses of its development as it gained gradual acceptance in the Brahmanic fold. \n\nBurley argues for an ontegenetic or incremental development of Samkhya, instead of being established by one historical founder. Burley states that India's religio-cultural heritage is complicated and likely experienced a non-linear development. Samkhya is not necessarily non-Vedic nor pre-Vedic nor a 'reaction to Brahmanic hegemony', states Burley. It is most plausibly in its origins a lineage that grew and evolved from a combination of ascetic traditions and Vedic guru (teacher) and disciples. Burley suggests the link between Samkhya and Yoga as likely the root of this evolutionary origin during the Vedic era of India. According to Van Buitenen, various ideas on yoga and meditation developed in the interaction between various sramanas and ascetic groups. \n\nThe earliest mention of dualism is in the Rigveda , a text that was compiled in the late second millennium BCE., in various chapters.\n\nNasadiya Sukta (Hymn of non-Eternity, origin of universe):\n\nThere was neither non-existence nor existence then; Neither the realm of space, nor the sky which is beyond; What stirred? Where? In whose protection?\n\nThere was neither death nor immortality then; No distinguishing sign of night nor of day; That One breathed, windless, by its own impulse; Other than that there was nothing beyond.\n\nDarkness there was at first, by darkness hidden; Without distinctive marks, this all was water; That which, becoming, by the void was covered; That One by force of heat came into being;\n\nWho really knows? Who will here proclaim it? Whence was it produced? Whence is this creation? Gods came afterwards, with the creation of this universe. Who then knows whence it has arisen?\n\nWhether God's will created it, or whether He was mute; Perhaps it formed itself, or perhaps it did not; Only He who is its overseer in highest heaven knows, Only He knows, or perhaps He does not know.\n\nAt a mythical level, dualism is found in the Indra – Vritra myth of chapter 1.32 of the Rigveda . Enumeration, the etymological root of the word samkhya , is found in numerous chapters of the Rigveda, such as 1.164, 10.90 and 10.129. According to Larson, it is likely that in the oldest period these enumerations were occasionally also applied in the context of meditation themes and religious cosmology, such as in the hymns of 1.164 (Riddle Hymns) and 10.129 (Nasadiya Hymns). However, these hymns present only the outline of ideas, not specific Samkhya theories and these theories developed in a much later period. \n\nThe Riddle hymns of the Rigveda, famous for their numerous enumerations, structural language symmetry within the verses and the chapter, enigmatic word play with anagrams that symbolically portray parallelism in rituals and the cosmos, nature and the inner life of man. This hymn includes enumeration (counting) as well as a series of dual concepts cited by early Upanishads . For example, the hymns 1.164.2 - 1.164-3 mention \"seven\" multiple times, which in the context of other chapters of Rigveda have been interpreted as referring to both seven priests at a ritual and seven constellations in the sky, the entire hymn is a riddle that paints a ritual as well as the sun, moon, earth, three seasons, the transitory nature of living beings, the passage of time and spirit. \n\nSeven to the one-wheeled chariot yoke the Courser; bearing seven names the single Courser draws it. Three-naved the wheel is, sound and undecaying, whereon are resting all these worlds of being. The seven [priests] who on the seven-wheeled car are mounted have horses, seven in tale, who draw them onward. Seven Sisters utter songs of praise together, in whom the names of the seven Cows are treasured. Who hath beheld him as he [Sun/Agni] sprang to being, seen how the boneless One [spirit] supports the bony [body]? Where is the blood of earth, the life, the spirit? Who will approach the one who knows, to ask this?\n\nThe chapter 1.164 asks a number of metaphysical questions, such as \"what is the One in the form of the Unborn that created the six realms of the world?\". Dualistic philosophical speculations then follow in chapter 1.164 of the Rigveda, particularly in the well studied \"allegory of two birds\" hymn (1.164.20 - 1.164.22), a hymn that is referred to in the Mundaka Upanishad and other texts . The two birds in this hymn have been interpreted to mean various forms of dualism: \"the sun and the moon\", the \"two seekers of different kinds of knowledge\", and \"the body and the atman\". \n\nTwo Birds with fair wings, knit with bonds of friendship, embrace the same tree. One of the twain eats the sweet fig; the other not eating keeps watch. Where those fine Birds hymn ceaselessly their portion of life eternal, and the sacred synods, There is the Universe's mighty Keeper, who, wise, hath entered into me the simple. The tree on which the fine Birds eat the sweetness, where they all rest and procreate their offspring, Upon its top they say the fig is sweetest, he who does not know the Father will not reach it.\n\nThe emphasis of duality between existence (sat) and non-existence (asat) in the Nasadiya Sukta of the Rigveda is similar to the vyakta– avyakta (manifest–unmanifest) polarity in Samkhya. The hymns about Puruṣa may also have had some influence on Samkhya. The Samkhya notion of buddhi or mahat is similar to the notion of hiranyagarbha , which appears in both the Rigveda and the Shvetashvatara Upanishad . \n\nHigher than the senses, stand the objects of senses. Higher than objects of senses, stands mind. Higher than mind, stands intellect. Higher than intellect, stands the great self. Higher than the great self, stands Avyaktam (unmenifested or indistinctive). Higher than Avyaktam , stands Purusha. Higher than this, there is nothing. He is the final goal and the highest point. In all beings, dwells this Purusha, as Atman (essence), invisible, concealed. He is only seen by the keenest thought, by the sublest of those thinkers who see into the subtle.\n\nThe oldest of the major Upanishads (c. 900–600 BCE) contain speculations along the lines of classical Samkhya philosophy. The concept of ahamkara was traced back by Van Buitenen to chapters 1.2 and 1.4 of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad and chapter 7.25 of the Chāndogya Upaniṣad , where it is a \"cosmic entity,\" and not a psychological notion. Satkaryavada, the theory of causation in Samkhya, may in part be traced to the verses in sixth chapter which emphasize the primacy of sat (being) and describe creation from it. The idea that the three gunas or attributes influence creation is found in both Chandogya and Shvetashvatara Upanishads . \n\nYajnavalkya 's exposition on the Self in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad , and the dialogue between Uddalaka Aruni and his son Svetaketu in the Chandogya Upanishad represent a more developed notion of the essence of man ( Atman ) as \"pure subjectivity - i.e., the knower who is himself unknowable, the seer who cannot be seen,\" and as \"pure conscious,\" discovered by means of speculations, or enumerations. According to Larson, \"it seems quite likely that both the monistic trends in Indian thought and the dualistic samkhya could have developed out of these ancient speculations.\" According to Larson, the enumeration of tattvas in Samkhya is also found in Taittiriya Upanishad , Aitareya Upanishad and Yajnavalkya–Maitri dialogue in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. \n\nJainism was re-organised in 9th century BCE and Buddhism had developed in eastern India by the 5th century BCE. It is probable that these schools of thought and the earliest schools of Samkhya influenced each other. According to Burely, there is no evidence that a systematic samkhya-philosophy existed prior to the founding of Buddhism and Jainism, sometime in the 5th or 4th century BCE. A prominent similarity between Buddhism and Samkhya is the greater emphasis on suffering ( dukkha ) as the foundation for their respective soteriological theories, than other Indian philosophies. However, suffering appears central to Samkhya in its later literature, which likely suggests a Buddhist influence. Eliade , however, presents the alternate theory that Samkhya and Buddhism developed their soteriological theories over time, benefiting from their mutual influence. \n\nLikewise, the Jain doctrine of plurality of individual souls ( jiva ) could have influenced the concept of multiple purushas in Samkhya. However Hermann Jacobi, an Indologist, thinks that there is little reason to assume that Samkhya notion of Purushas was solely dependent on the notion of jiva in Jainism. It is more likely, that Samkhya was moulded by many ancient theories of soul in various Vedic and non-Vedic schools. \n\nThis declared to you is the Yoga of the wisdom of Samkhya. Hear, now, of the integrated wisdom with which, Partha, you will cast off the bonds of karma.\n\nLarson, Bhattacharya and Potter state it to be likely that early Samkhya doctrines found in oldest Upanishads ( c. 700-800 BCE) provided the contextual foundations and influenced Buddhist and Jaina doctrines, and these became contemporaneous, sibling intellectual movements with Samkhya and other schools of Hindu philosophy. This is evidenced, for example, by the references to Samkhya in ancient and medieval era Jaina literature. \n\nSamkhya and Yoga are mentioned together for first time in chapter 6.13 of the Shvetashvatra Upanishad, as samkhya-yoga-adhigamya (literally, \"to be understood by proper reasoning and spiritual discipline\"). \n\nThe Katha Upanishad (5th-1st c. BCE) in verses 3.10–13 and 6.7–11 describes a concept of puruṣa, and other concepts also found in later Samkhya. The Shvetashvatara Upanishad in chapter 6.13 describes samkhya with Yoga philosophy, and Bhagavad Gita in book 2 provides axiological implications of Samkhya, therewith providing textual evidence of samkhyan terminology and concepts. Katha Upanishad conceives the Purusha (cosmic spirit, consciousness) as same as the individual soul ( Ātman , Self). \n\nThe Bhagavad Gita identifies Samkhya with understanding or knowledge. The three gunas are also mentioned in the Gita, though they are not used in the same sense as in classical Samkhya. The Gita integrates Samkhya thought with the devotion ( bhakti ) of theistic schools and the impersonal Brahman of Vedanta . \n\nThe Mokshadharma chapter of Shanti Parva (Book of Peace) in the Mahabharata epic, composed between 400 BCE to 400 CE, explains Samkhya ideas along with other extant philosophies, and then lists numerous scholars in recognition of their philosophical contributions to various Indian traditions, and therein at least three Samkhya scholars can be recognized – Kapila , Asuri and Pancasikha . The 12th chapter of the Buddhacarita , a buddhist text composed in the early second century CE, suggests Samkhya philosophical tools of reliable reasoning were well formed by about 5th century BCE. According to Rusza, \"The ancient Buddhist Aśvaghoṣa (in his Buddha-Carita ) describes Āḷāra Kālāma , the teacher of the young Buddha (ca. 420 B.C.E.) as following an archaic form of Sāṅkhya.\" \n\nAccording to Ruzsa, about 2,000 years ago \"Sāṅkhya became the representative philosophy of Hindu thought in Hindu circles\", influencing all strands of the Hindu tradition and Hindu texts. \n\nSage Kapila is traditionally credited as a founder of the Samkhya school. It is unclear in which century of the 1st millennium BCE Kapila lived. Kapila appears in Rigveda , but context suggests that the word means 'reddish-brown color'. Both Kapila as a 'seer' and the term Samkhya appear in hymns of section 5.2 in Shvetashvatara Upanishad ( c. 300 BCE), suggesting Kapila's and Samkhya philosophy's origins may predate it. Numerous other ancient Indian texts mention Kapila; for example, Baudhayana Grhyasutra in chapter IV.16.1 describes a system of rules for ascetic life credited to Kapila called Kapila Sannyasa Vidha . A 6th century CE Chinese translation and other texts consistently note Kapila as an ascetic and the founder of the school, mention Asuri as the inheritor of the teaching and a much later scholar named Pancasikha as the scholar who systematized it and then helped widely disseminate its ideas. Isvarakrsna is identified in these texts as the one who summarized and simplified Samkhya theories of Pancasikha, many centuries later (roughly 4th or 5th century CE), in the form that was then translated into Chinese by Paramartha in the 6th century CE. \n\nThe earliest surviving authoritative text on classical Samkhya philosophy is the Samkhya Karika (c. 200 CE or 350–450 CE ) of Īśvarakṛṣṇa. There were probably other texts in early centuries CE, however none of them are available today. Iśvarakṛṣṇa in his Kārikā describes a succession of the disciples from Kapila, through Āsuri and Pañcaśikha to himself. The text also refers to an earlier work of Samkhya philosophy called Ṣaṣṭitantra (science of sixty topics) which is now lost. The text was imported and translated into Chinese about the middle of the 6th century CE. The records of Al Biruni , the Persian visitor to India in the early 11th century, suggests Samkhyakarika was an established and definitive text in India in his times. \n\nSamkhyakarika includes distilled statements on epistemology, metaphysics and soteriology of the Samkhya school. For example, the fourth to sixth verses of the text states it epistemic premises, \n\nPerception, inference and right affirmation are admitted to be threefold proof; for they (are by all acknowledged, and) comprise every mode of demonstration. It is from proof that belief of that which is to be proven results.\n\nPerception is ascertainment of particular objects. Inference, which is of three sorts, premises an argument, and deduces that which is argued by it. Right affirmation is true revelation ( Apta vacana and Sruti , testimony of reliable source and the Vedas).\n\nSensible objects become known by perception; but it is by inference or reasoning that acquaintance with things transcending the senses is obtained. A truth which is neither to be directly perceived, nor to be inferred from reasoning, is deduced from Apta vacana and Sruti .\n\nThe most popular commentary on the Samkhyakarika was the Gauḍapāda Bhāṣya attributed to Gauḍapāda , the proponent of Advaita Vedanta school of philosophy. Other important commentaries on the karika were Yuktidīpīka (c. 6th century CE) and Vācaspati ’s Sāṁkhyatattvakaumudī (c. 10th century CE). \n\nBetween 1938 and 1967, two previously unknown manuscript editions of Yuktidipika (ca. 600–700 CE) were discovered and published. Yuktidipika is an ancient review by an unknown author and has emerged as the most important commentary on the Samkhyakarika , itself an ancient key text of the Samkhya school. This commentary as well as the reconstruction of pre- karika epistemology and Samkhya emanation text (containing cosmology-ontology) from the earliest Puranas and Mokshadharma suggest that Samkhya as a technical philosophical system existed from about the last century BCE to the early centuries of the Common Era. Yuktidipika suggests that many more ancient scholars contributed to the origins of Samkhya in ancient India than were previously known and that Samkhya was a polemical philosophical system. However, almost nothing is preserved from the centuries when these ancient Samkhya scholars lived. \n\nThe 13th century text Sarvadarsanasangraha contains 16 chapters, each devoted to a separate school of Indian philosophy. The 13th chapter in this book contains a description of the Samkhya philosophy. \n\nThe Sāṁkhyapravacana Sūtra (c. 14th century CE) renewed interest in Samkhya in the medieval era. It is considered the second most important work of Samkhya after the karika. Commentaries on this text were written by Anirruddha ( Sāṁkhyasūtravṛtti , c. 15th century CE), Vijñānabhikṣu ( Sāṁkhyapravacanabhāṣya , c. 16th century CE), Mahādeva (vṛttisāra, c. 17th century CE) and Nāgeśa ( Laghusāṁkhyasūtravṛtti ). In his introduction, the commentator Vijnana Bhiksu stated that only a sixteenth part of the original Samkhya Sastra remained, and that the rest had been lost to time. While the commentary itself is no doubt medieval, the age of the underlying sutras is unknown and perhaps much older. According to Surendranath Dasgupta , scholar of Indian philosophy, Charaka Samhita , an ancient Indian medical treatise, also contains thoughts from an early Samkhya school. \n\nAlthough the Samkhya school considers the Vedas a reliable source of knowledge, samkhya accepts the notion of higher selves or perfected beings but rejects the notion of God, according to Paul Deussen and other scholars, although other scholars believe that Samkhya is as much theistic as the Yoga school. \n\nAccording to Rajadhyaksha , classical Samkhya argues against the existence of God on metaphysical grounds. Samkhya theorists argue that an unchanging God cannot be the source of an ever-changing world and that God was only a necessary metaphysical assumption demanded by circumstances. \n\nThe oldest commentary on the Samkhyakarika , the Yuktidīpikā, asserts the existence of God, stating:\n\"We do not completely reject the particular power of the Lord, since he assumes a majestic body and so forth. Our intended meaning is just that there is no being who is different from prakrti and purusa and who is the instigator of these two, as you claim. Therefore, your view is refuted. The conjunction between prakrti and purusa is not instigated by another being.\" \n\nA medieval commentary of Samkhyakarika such as Sāṁkhyapravacana Sūtra in verse no. 1.92 directly states that existence of \"Ishvara (God) is unproved\". Hence there is no philosophical place for a creationist God in this system. It is also argued by commentators of this text that the existence of Ishvara cannot be proved and hence cannot be admitted to exist. However, later in the text, the commentator Vijnana Bhiksu clarified that the subject of dispute between the Samkhyas and others was the existence of an eternal Isvara. Samkhya did accept the concept of an emergent Isvara previously absorbed into Prakriti. \n\nA key difference between the Samkhya and Yoga schools, state scholars, is that the Yoga school accepts a 'personal, yet essentially inactive, deity' or 'personal god'. However, Radhanath Phukan, in the introduction to his translation of the Samkhya Karika of Isvarakrsna has argued that commentators who see the unmanifested as non-conscious make the mistake of regarding Samkhya as atheistic, though Samkhya is equally as theistic as Yoga. A majority of modern academic scholars are of view that the concept of Ishvara was incorporated into the nirishvara (atheistic) Samkhya viewpoint only after it became associated with the Yoga , the Pasupata and the Bhagavata schools of philosophy. Others have traced the concept of the emergent Isvara accepted by Samkhya to as far back as the Rig Veda, where it was called Hiranyagarbha (the golden germ, golden egg). This theistic Samkhya philosophy is described in the Mahabharata , the Puranas and the Bhagavad Gita . \n\nChandradhar Sharma in 1960 affirmed that Samkhya in the beginning was based on the theistic absolute of Upanishads, but later on, under the influence of Jaina and Buddhist thought, it rejected theistic monism and was content with spiritualistic pluralism and atheistic realism. This also explains why some of the later Samkhya commentators, e.g. Vijnanabhiksu in the sixteenth century, tried to revive the earlier theism in Samkhya. : 137 Burley and Gopal suggest distinguishing between theistic and non-theistic streams of Samkhya traditions as \"seśvara ('with lord')\" and \"nirīśvara ('without lord')\" respectively. Burley suggests that the Svetasvatara Upanishad is a paradigmatic example of seśvara Samkhya whereas the Samkhyakarika is a paradigmatic example of nirīśvara Samkhya. \n\nAccording to Sinha, the following arguments were given by Samkhya philosophers against the idea of an eternal, self-caused, creator God: \n\nTherefore, Samkhya maintained that the various cosmological, ontological and teleological arguments could not prove God.\n\nThe Vaisheshika atomism, Nyaya epistemology may all have roots in the early Samkhya school of thought; but these schools likely developed in parallel with an evolving Samkhya tradition, as sibling intellectual movements. \n\nThe Yoga school derives its ontology and epistemology from Samkhya and adds to it the concept of Isvara . However, scholarly opinion on the actual relationship between Yoga and Samkhya is divided. While Jakob Wilhelm Hauer and Georg Feuerstein believe that Yoga was a tradition common to many Indian schools and its association with Samkhya was artificially foisted upon it by commentators such as Vyasa . Johannes Bronkhorst and Eric Frauwallner think that Yoga never had a philosophical system separate from Samkhya. Bronkhorst further adds that the first mention of Yoga as a separate school of thought is no earlier than Śankara 's (c. 788–820 CE) Brahmasūtrabhaśya. \n\nThe dualistic metaphysics of various Tantric traditions illustrates the strong influence of Samkhya on Tantra. Shaiva Siddhanta was identical to Samkhya in its philosophical approach, barring the addition of a transcendent theistic reality. Knut A. Jacobsen, Professor of Religious Studies, notes the influence of Samkhya on Srivaishnavism . According to him, this Tantric system borrows the abstract dualism of Samkhya and modifies it into a personified male–female dualism of Vishnu and Sri Lakshmi . Dasgupta speculates that the Tantric image of a wild Kali standing on a slumbering Shiva was inspired from the Samkhyan conception of prakṛti as a dynamic agent and Purusha as a passive witness. However, Samkhya and Tantra differed in their view on liberation. While Tantra sought to unite the male and female ontological realities, Samkhya held a withdrawal of consciousness from matter as the ultimate goal. \n\nAccording to Bagchi, the Samkhya Karika (in karika 70) identifies Sāmkhya as a Tantra , and its philosophy was one of the main influences both on the rise of the Tantras as a body of literature, as well as Tantra sadhana . \n\nThe Advaita Vedanta philosopher Adi Shankara called Samkhya as the 'principal opponent' ( pradhana-malla ) of the Vedanta. He criticized the Samkhya view that the cause of the universe is the unintelligent Prakriti ( Pradhan ). According to Shankara, the Intelligent Brahman only can be such a cause. : 242–244 He considered Samkhya philosophy as propounded in Samkhyakarika to be inconsistent with the teachings in the Vedas, and considered the dualism in Samkhya to be non-Vedic. In contrast, ancient Samkhya philosophers in India claimed Vedic authority for their views. ",
  "Ursula \" Uschi \" Obermaier ( German pronunciation: [ˈʊʃi ˈʔoːbɐˌmaɪɐ] ⓘ ; born 24 September 1946) is a former fashion model and actress associated with the 1968 left-wing movement in Germany. She is considered an iconic sex symbol of the so-called \"1968 generation\" and the protests of 1968 . \n\nObermaier was born in Sendling , a district of Munich , Germany. She started an apprenticeship as a photo-restorer but gave it up to become a model. She was discovered by the magazine Twen . After a successful photo-shoot with photographer Guido Mangold [ de ] in Cameroon , she became its top model and internationally famous. She went on to work for other magazines and top photographers such as Helmut Newton . \n\nIn Munich, she was briefly a member of the Munich-based experimental commune and band Amon Düül around 1968–69 and lived in their commune . She met communard Rainer Langhans at a concert at the end of 1968 and she soon moved from Munich to the Berlin-based Kommune 1 after Langhans became her boyfriend. They talked openly to the media about their relationship, becoming symbols of the sexual revolution . They became the German version of John Lennon and Yoko Ono . \n\nKommune 1 was the first politically motivated commune in Germany, and Obermaier's name is most intimately connected with the 1960s student rebellions in the minds of many Germans. However, she later said that she had no particular interest in politics, and that she moved into Kommune 1 simply to be close to Langhans. Photos of her at political demonstrations and with members of the Kommune appeared in all the popular magazines of the time.\n\nAfter the end of Kommune 1 in 1969, Langhans and Obermaier moved to the Highfisch-Kommune in Munich.\n\nIn 1973, Obermaier fell in love with Dieter Bockhorn [ de ] , the wealthy owner of a club in Hamburg's Reeperbahn red-light district.\n\nObermaier went on The Rolling Stones' Tour of the Americas '75 and is said to have had affairs with both Keith Richards and Mick Jagger , as well as with Jimi Hendrix – a visitor to Kommune 1 – with whom she can be seen kissing and cuddling farewell outside the West Berlin hotel Kempinski in the movie Last Experience . \n\nObermaier and Bockhorn travelled the world in a customized bus, first spending three years in Asia, then going to Mexico and the U.S. for another three years. Obermaier said in an interview in 2006 that reports that she and Bockhorn had a traditional wedding in every country they travelled in were untrue. They married only once, in India. Their relationship ended abruptly after ten years when Dieter Bockhorn died in a motorcycle accident in Mexico on New Year's Eve, 1983. \n\nObermaier played alongside Iris Berben in Rudolf Thome 's Detectives (1969). She was the protagonist of Red Sun (1970). She also played a small role alongside Rainer Langhans in Haytabo , and portrayed Marlene in the film adaptation of the novel Blutrausch . \n\nShe played maracas in the band Amon Düül I on three albums: Psychedelic Underground (1969), Collapsing (1970), and Disaster (1972). She also sang in Michael Hoening's (former Tangerine Dream member) album - Departure from Northern Wasteland in \"Voices Of Where\".\n\nThe authorized biography of Obermaier's life, High Times , was written by Obermaier and Olaf Kraemer [ de ] . The book reached third place on the best seller list and stayed there for five months.\n\nThis biography was adapted into a biographical film, Eight Miles High (original German title: Das wilde Leben ). The controversial movie was directed by Achim Bornhak [ de ] and released in February 2007. The movie was reclassified by distributors from PG 16 to PG 12 and reached number ten at the box office. The aggregate film review website Metacritic awarded it a score of 32 out of 100, based on 10 reviews. \n\nUschi Obermaier was granted American citizenship. She lived in Topanga Canyon near Los Angeles, and works as a jewellery designer. Today, she lives on the Algarve coast, Portugal. \n\nUschi is featured on the cover of 12\" single, These Days, by Los Angeles band Xu Xu Fang",
  "A paifang , also known as a pailou , is a traditional style of Chinese architecture , often used in arch or gateway structures.\n\nThe word paifang ( Chinese : 牌坊 ; pinyin : páifāng ) was originally a collective term for the top two levels of administrative division and subdivisions of ancient Chinese cities. The largest division within a city in ancient China was a fang ( 坊 ; fāng ), equivalent to a current day ward . Each fang was enclosed by walls or fences, and the gates of these enclosures were shut and guarded every night. Each fang was further divided into several pai ( 牌 ; pái ; 'placard'), which is equivalent to a current day (unincorporated) community. Each pai , in turn, contained an area including several hutongs (alleyways).\n\nThis system of urban administrative division and subdivision reached an elaborate level during the Tang dynasty , and continued in the following dynasties. For example, during the Ming dynasty , Beijing was divided into a total of 36 fangs. Originally, the word paifang referred to the gate of a fang and the marker for an entrance of a building complex or a town; but by the Song dynasty , a paifang had evolved into a purely decorative monument.\n\nDuring the Tang dynasty, it was called a wutoumen ( 烏頭門 ; wūtóumén ; 'black top gate'), because the top of the two posts were painted black. A wutoumen was reserved for officials of rank 6 or higher.\n\nThe construction of wutomen was standardized in the Yingzao Fashi of the mid Song dynasty . It consisted of two posts and a horizontal beam forming a frame and two doors. By the Ming and Qing dynasties, it was called a pailou or paifang , and evolved into a more elaborate structure with more posts and gates, with a superstructural gable on top; the highest rank was a five gate-six post-eleven gable pailou.\n\nIt has been theorized that the paifang gate architecture was influenced by Buddhist torana temple gates. Paifang have traditional Chinese architectural characteristics such as multi-tiered roofs, various supporting posts, and archway-shapes of traditional gates and towers. \n\nPaifang come in a number of forms. One form involves placing wooden pillars onto stone bases, which are bound together with wooden beams. This type of paifang is always beautifully decorated, with the pillars usually painted in red, the beams decorated with intricate designs and Chinese calligraphy , and the roof covered with coloured tiles, complete with mythical beasts—just like a Chinese palace. Another form of paifang is in the form of true archways made of stone or bricks; the walls may be painted, or decorated with coloured tiles; the top of the archways is decorated like their wooden counterparts. Yet another form of paifang , built mainly on religious and burial grounds, consists of plain white stone pillars and beams, with neither roof tiles nor any coloured decoration, but feature elaborate carvings created by master masons . Another form is in the Han dynasty style, and is two matching towers, such as in Beihai.\n\nOutside of China , the paifang has long been the symbol of Chinatowns . The largest outside of China is in the United States: Friendship Archway at 14.50 m (47 ft 7 in) tall and 23 m (75 ft) wide, completed in 1986 at H and 7th in Washington D.C.'s Chinatown . In Europe, the largest paifang spans Nelson Street in Liverpool , completed in 2000 and standing 13.5 m (44 ft) tall. The first paifang in the United States was raised in 1915 as a temporary installation for the Chinese pavilion of the Panama–Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco, and the oldest still standing was erected in 1938 for Los Angeles , Chinatown West Gate on Hill Street; it was listed as a city Historic-Cultural Monument (#825) along with its counterpart, Chinatown East Gate (1939, #826) in November 2005. The paifang at the entrance to Ottawa 's Chinatown was decorated by Chinese artists using Chinese materials and techniques. \n\nIn the past , \"Chastity Paifang \" were given to widows who remained unmarried till death , praising what was seen as loyalty to their deceased husbands. [ citation needed ]",
  "Aggadah ( Hebrew : אַגָּדָה , romanized : Aggāḏā , or הַגָּדָה Haggāḏā ; Jewish Babylonian Aramaic : אֲגַדְתָּא , romanized: Aggāḏṯā ; 'tales', 'legend', 'lore') is the non-legalistic exegesis which appears in the classical rabbinic literature of Judaism , particularly the Talmud and Midrash . In general, Aggadah is a compendium of rabbinic texts that incorporates folklore, historical anecdotes, moral exhortations, and practical advice in various spheres, from business to medicine. \n\nThe Hebrew word haggadah (הַגָּדָה) is derived from the Hebrew root נגד, meaning \"declare, make known, expound\", also known from the common Hebrew verb להגיד. \n\nThe majority scholarly opinion is that the Hebrew word aggadah (אַגָּדָה) and corresponding Aramaic aggadta (אֲגַדְתָּא) are variants of haggadah based on a common linguistic shift from haphalah to aphalah forms. However, a minority of scholars believe that these words derive from a separate Aramaic root נגד meaning \"draw, pull, spread, stretch\" (corresponding to the Hebrew root משך or נטה). \n\nAccording to the latter etymology, aggadah may be seen as \"the part of the Torah which draws man towards its teachings\", or the teachings which strengthen one's religious experience and spiritual connections, in addition to explaining texts. (See similar re Masorah – in the sense of \"tradition\" – at Masoretic Text § Etymology .)\n\nThe Aggadah is part of Judaism 's Oral Torah , the traditions providing the authoritative interpretation of the Written Torah . In this context, the widely-held view in rabbinic literature is that the Aggadah is in fact a medium for the transmission of fundamental teachings (Homiletic Sayings— מאמרים לימודיים ‎) or for explanations of verses in the Hebrew Bible ( Exegetic Sayings— מאמרים ביאוריים ‎). Rabbinic thought, therefore, understands much of the Aggadah as containing a hidden, allegorical dimension, in addition to its overt, literal sense. In general, where a literal interpretation contradicts rationality, the rabbis seek an allegorical explanation: \"We are told to use our common sense to decide whether an aggada is to be taken literally or not\" (Carmell, 2005).\n\nMoshe Chaim Luzzatto (1707–1746), discusses this two-tiered, literal-allegorical mode of transmission of the Aggadah in his Discourse on the Haggadot . He explains that the Oral Law, in fact, comprises two components: the legal component ( חלק המצוות ‎), discussing the mitzvot and halakha ; and \"the secret\" component ( חלק הסודות ‎), discussing the deeper teachings. The Aggadah, along with the Kabbalah , falls under the latter. The rabbis of the Mishnaic era ( c. 10 to c. 220 CE) believed that it would be dangerous to record the deeper teachings in an explicit, mishnah-like, medium. Rather, they would be conveyed in a \"concealed mode\" and via \"paradoxes\". (Due to their value, these teachings should not become accessible to those \"of bad character\"; and due to their depth they should not be made available to those \"not schooled in the ways of analysis\".) This mode of transmission nevertheless depended on consistent rules and principles such that those \"equipped with the keys\" would be able to unlock their meaning; to others they would appear as non-rational or fantastic.\n\nIn line with the above, Samuel ibn Naghrillah (993–1056), in his \"Introduction to the Talmud\", states that \"Aggadah comprises any comment occurring in the Talmud on any topic which is not a commandment (i.e. which is not halachic ) and one should derive from it only that which is reasonable.\" As regards this, Maimonides (1138–1204), in his preface to the tenth chapter of Tractate Sanhedrin ( Perek Chelek ), describes three possible approaches to the interpretation of the Aggadah: \n\nMaimonides' approach is also widely held amongst the non-rationalistic, mystical streams of Judaism—thus, for example, Isaiah Horowitz ( c. 1555 -1630) holds that \"none of these sometimes mind-boggling 'stories' are devoid of profound meaning; if anyone is devoid of understanding, it is the reader\" ( Shnei Luchos HaBris , introduction).\nSee also the Maharal's approach .\n\nThe Aggadah is today recorded in the Midrash and the Talmud .\n\nIn the Midrash, the aggadic and halakhic material are compiled as two distinct collections:\n\nMany of the Torah commentaries , as well as the Targumim , interpret the Torah text in the light of Aggadic statements, particularly those in the Midrash, and hence contain much material on Aggadah interpretation.\n\nThroughout the Talmud, aggadic and halakhic material are interwoven—legal material comprises around 90%. (Tractate Avoth , which has no gemara , deals exclusively with non-halakhic material, though it is not regarded as aggadic in that it focuses largely on character development.) The Talmudic Aggadah, generally, convey the \"deeper teachings\"—though in concealed mode, as discussed. The aggadic material in the Babylonian Talmud is also presented separately in Ein Yaakov , a compilation of the Aggadah together with commentaries.\n\nWell-known works interpreting the Aggadot in the Talmud include:\n\nThe Aggadah has been preserved in a series of different works, which, like all works of traditional literature, have come to their present form through previous collections and revisions. Their original forms existed long before they were reduced to writing.\n\nThe first traces of the midrashic exegesis are found in the Bible itself; while in the time of the Soferim the development of the Midrash Aggadah received a mighty impetus, and the foundations were laid for public services which were soon to offer the chief medium for the cultivation of Bible exegesis.\n\nAbtalion and Shemaiah are the first to bear the title darshan , and it was probably by no mere chance that their pupil Hillel was the first to lay down hermeneutic rules for the interpretation of the Midrash ; he may have been indebted to his teachers for the tendency toward aggadic interpretation. These two scholars are the first whose sayings are recorded in the aggadah . The new method of derush (Biblical interpretation) introduced by Abtalion and Shemaiah seems to have evoked opposition among the Pharisees. \n\nMuch Aggadah, often mixed with foreign elements, is found in the Apocrypha , the Pseudepigrapha , the works of Josephus and Philo , and the remaining Judæo-Hellenistic literature; but aggadic exegesis reached its highest development in the great epoch of the Mishnaic-Talmudic period , between 100 and 550 CE.\n\nThe Aggadah of the Amoraim (sages of the Talmud) is the continuation of that of the Tannaim (sages of the Mishna). The final edition of the Mishnah, which was of such signal importance for the Halakah, is of less significance for the Aggadah, which, in form as well as in content, shows the same characteristics in both periods.\n\nIt is important to emphasize the fundamental difference in plan between the midrashim forming a running commentary (מאמרים ביאוריים) to the Scripture text, and the homiletic midrashim (מאמרים לימודיים). When the scholars undertook to edit, revise, and collect into individual midrashim the immense array of haggadot, they followed the method employed in the collections and revisions of the halakhot and the halakhic discussions. [ citation needed ] The form which suggested itself was to arrange in textual sequence the exegetical interpretations of the Biblical text as taught in the schools, or the occasional interpretations introduced into public discourses, etc., and which were in any way connected with Scripture. Since the work of the editor was often merely that of compilation, the existing midrashim show in many passages the character of the sources from which they were taken. This was the genesis of the midrashim which are in the nature of running haggadic commentaries to single books of the Bible, as Bereshit Rabbah, Eikah Rabbati, the midrashim to the other Megillot, etc. See Midrash for more details.\n\nEin Yaakov is a compilation of the aggadic material in the Babylonian Talmud together with commentary. It was compiled by Jacob ibn Habib and (after his death) by his son Levi ibn Habib , and was first published in Saloniki (Greece) in 1515. It was intended as a text of aggadah, that could be studied with \"the same degree of seriousness as the Talmud itself\". \n\nPopularized anthologies did not appear until more recently—these often incorporate \"aggadot\" from outside of classical Rabbinic literature . The major works include:\n\nNotes\n\nBibliography\n\nDiscussion\n\nSource material\n\nTextual resources",
  "A Jugendburg , sometimes referred to in English as a youth castle , is a medieval castle in German-speaking countries that was converted during the 20th century into a public community centre or educational facility for young people. The sponsors of the original youth castles came mainly from the Wandervogel and Pfadfinder movement, or were at least linked to the youth movement .\n\nThe term Jugendburg originally referred to the use of castles ( Burgen ) by young people ( Jugend ).\n\nThe difference between Jugendburgen in this historical sense and Jugendburgen in the sense of castles that were used as youth hostels , for example run by the German Youth Hostel Association , is disputed. For example, youth hostels had already emerged in the early 20th century in the wake of the youth movement ( Jugendbewegung ) as accommodation for young men, youth groups and school classes. And as early as 1912 the first German youth hostel was established by Richard Schirrmann at Altena Castle (it was rebuilt from 1906 to 1915) above the town of Altena . During the Nazi era youth castles were used by the Hitler Youth and the League of German Girls , and the term was increasingly associated with Nazi ideology . From 1935 to 1943 there was also a schoolchildren's magazine with the title Deutsche Jugendburg (\"German Youth Castle\"), which was published by the National Socialist Teachers League .\n\nIn connexion with Jugendburgen one frequently comes across the names Gustav Wyneken, Robert Oelbermann and Karl Oelbermann .\n\nIn 1910, the progressive educationalist, Gustav Wyneken , was the chairman of the Bund für freie Schulgemeinden and publisher of its magazine. He also tried to found a new school or \"Jugendburg\" to serve his progressive educational project based on the concept of upbringing as the \"Formation of People in the Sense of a Worldview\" ( Formung des Menschen im Sinne einer Weltanschauung ). For Wyneken it was about a redefinition of the relationships between teacher and pupil. This was to be based on \"comradeship\" ( Kameradschaft ) and \"leadership\" ( Führertum ).\n\nUsing his pedagogical approach, Wyneken influenced the emerging youth movement as an adult from 1912 onwards. Wyneken created the concept of \" youth culture \" in opposition to the perceived subservience of Wilhelmine Germany as well as against school and family. In 1913, he worked to organise the First Free German Youth Day at the Hoher Meissner . Here, too, tensions arose, since Wyneken was a leader figure, a concept rejected by many groups at the youth day. The Freideutsche Jugend network which emerged that day around the Meissner Declaration had an anti-rationalist view point at odds with Wyneken's approach. \n\nFascinated by Wyneken's ideas, the brothers, Robert and Karl Oelbermann, dreamt of the Jugendburg concept after the First World War . Robert Oelbermann is considered to be the founder of the \"Nerother Wandervogel - Federation for the Establishment of the Rhenish Youth Castle\" ( Nerother Wandervogel - Bund zur Errichtung der Rheinischen Jugendburg ). By \"Rhenish Jugendburg\", he meant Waldeck Castle in the Hunsrück mountains. The Nerother Wandervogel was founded on 27 March 1921 at Drachenfels Castle at Busenberg in the Wasgau region of southwest Germany.\n\nThe Jugendburgen were mostly used to create an independent place of encounter whilst also preserving valuable historical monuments and giving them a new and meaningful use.\n\nNowadays, the aims of a Jugendburg are unchanged; it is about developing young people away from the perceived restrictions and conventions of society.\n\nAs the numbers of scouts and youth leagues continued to rise, the castles became international meeting places at which camps could be held.",
  "Yubitsume ( 指詰め , \"finger shortening\") or otoshimae is a Japanese ritual to atone for offenses to another, a way to be punished or to show sincere apology and remorse to another, by means of amputating portions of one's own little finger . In modern times, it is primarily performed by the yakuza , a collection of Japanese criminal organizations . \n\nThe ritual is thought to have originated with the bakuto , itinerant gamblers who were predecessors of the modern yakuza . If a person was unable to pay off a gambling debt, yubitsume was sometimes considered an alternative form of repayment. Yubitsume was a form of credit and reputation score. \n\nYubitsume is also a sign of surrender by the defeated in a yakuza war. The reason for this is that in Japanese swordsmanship ( kendo and iaido ), the sword cannot be held tightly, and the little finger's grip is the tightest on the hilt . A little-finger amputee was therefore unable to grip his sword properly, weakening him in battle and making him more dependent on the protection of his boss, and thus overall weakening the family's ability to fight in a war. As such, it can be seen as a sign of insurance of compliance with the terms of truce imposed upon the loser by the victor.\n\nTo perform yubitsume , one lays down a small clean cloth and lays the hand onto the cloth facing down. Using an extremely sharp knife, or tantō , the person cuts off the portion of his left little finger above the top knuckle on the finger or the tip of the finger. He then wraps the severed portion in the cloth and submits the \"package\" very graciously to his oyabun (\"godfather\" or boss), who is also referred to as a kumicho (patriarch/head of the family) – or to whomever this gesture of atonement is made, if it is not to his own boss.\n\nIf more offenses are committed, then the person moves on to the next joint of the finger to perform yubitsume . More infractions could mean removing portions of the right little finger when no more joints of the left finger remain. In some cases, a person expelled from a yakuza gang might be required to perform the yubitsume ritual.\n\nThe finger of the yakuza directly responsible for an offense is called an iki yubi , \"living finger\", while the finger of the yakuza that is directly in charge of him is called a shinu yubi , \"dead finger\". [ citation needed ]",
  "Axel Springer SE ( German pronunciation: [ˈaksl̩ ˈʃpʁɪŋɐ ɛsˈeː] ) is a European multinational mass and online media company, based in Berlin, Germany. The company offers printing and publishing of advertisements, digital classifieds portfolio, marketing models and related services. Axel Springer's operations are segmented into News Media, Classifieds Media, and Marketing Media. The company is organized as a societas Europaea (SE) publishing house and is one of the largest mass media publishers in the European Union , with numerous multimedia news brands , such as Bild , Die Welt , Fakt , and the US political news site Politico , which Axel Springer acquired in 2021. \n\nThe company generated total revenues of about €3.93 billion and an EBITDA increase of 12.8% in the first half of 2023. Following US private-equity firm KKR 's majority-stake acquisition in 2020, Axel Springer’s revenues have increased by a total of approximately €1 billion. The company, including its subsidiaries, joint ventures, and licenses, operates in more than 40 countries.\n\nThe company was started in 1946 by journalist Axel Springer . Mathias Döpfner became its CEO in 2002. In 2004, Axel Springer company, the largest publishing house in Europe at that time, controlled the largest German market share for daily newspapers; 23.6%, largely because its flagship tabloid Bild is the highest-circulation newspaper in Europe with a daily readership exceeding 12 million. By 2022, the company got 10.6% of the market share in Germany. \n\nOctober 2022 data indicates that Axel Springer's BILD brands attract approximately six million unique users daily, totaling up to 40 million unique users per month. IVW 's data from June 2023 shows BILD receiving 504 million monthly visits and WELT achieving 127 million. In the United States, Axel Springer is ranked among the top four digital publishers, alongside USA Today, News Corp, and The New York Times. \n\nIn 1946, publisher Hinrich Springer (age 66) and his son Axel Springer (age 34) established the limited company Axel Springer Verlag GmbH. That year saw the launch of the Nordwestdeutsche Hefte and the radio and Hörzu , which was originally launched as a radio broadcast but later became a TV magazine as well.\n\nIn 1948, the afternoon and evening newspaper Hamburger Abendblatt was launched, the first daily newspaper created by Axel Springer.\n\nThe year 1952 saw the launch of the popular daily newspaper Bild . The paper was based on the British tabloid Daily Mirror and peaked at a circulation of 5 million in the 1980s. The Sunday paper Bild am Sonntag was launched in 1956.\n\nIn 1953, Axel Springer Verlag bought the publishing house Die Welt, including the daily paper Die Welt and the Sunday paper Welt am Sonntag .\n\nConstruction on the company headquarters in Hamburg began in 1950 and was completed in 1956. \n\nIn 1956, Axel Springer secured a blocking minority in Ullstein Verlag , and three years later he took over the company completely. \n\nullstein bild is a brand for the photo collection (since 1877), now under Axel Springer Syndication GmbH. \n\nThis was followed in 1959 by the purchase of the newspaper Berliner Morgenpost . When Springer took over the Ullstein publishing house in December 1959, the B.Z. also became its property. \n\nTwo days before the end of the Soviet ultimatum in Berlin , Axel Springer laid the foundation stone for the new publishing headquarters on 25 May 1959. \n\nThe official opening of the Berlin headquarters took place in 1966. \n\nAfter the attack on the student leader Rudi Dutschke on 11 April 1968, the APO (Extra-Parliamentary Opposition) began acts of violence against the company. The APO had a history of animosity with the Springer Group's allegedly biased coverage of the student movement. For instance, in the wake of the killing of Benno Ohnesorg by the police at a student demonstration against the Shah, one Springer paper reported that \"what happened yesterday in Berlin had nothing to do with politics …. It was criminal in the most sickening way.\" In fact, Ohnesorg, who had never attended a demonstration before, had been shot in the back while trying to leave the demonstration. \n\nThe years 1972 and 1973 saw the building of the offset-printing plant in Essen-Kettwig. \n\n1984 witnessed the official opening of the offset printing facility in Ahrensburg near Hamburg.\n\nIn 1985, 49% of the company was offered for public subscription, marking the IPO of Axel Springer. Later that year, Axel Springer died; control of the company was transferred to his widow Friede Springer . \n\nIn 1986, the first licensed edition of Auto Bild came out, in Italy. Other licensed editions and joint venture publications later appeared in twenty European countries, Indonesia and Thailand.\n\nIn 1993, there was the official opening of the offset printing works in Berlin-Spandau.\n\nIn May 1999, Axel Springer bought a 51% majority stake in the American television production company GRB Entertainment , but was later divested in 2002. \n\nIn 2001, Axel Springer and T-Online established a joint subsidiary Bild.de/T-Online AG. A year later in 2002, the launch of immonet.de took place, and Mathias Doepfner, former editor-in-chief of Die Welt , became CEO of Axel Springer AG. Then in 2003, the name was changed to Axel Springer AG.\n\nIn 2009, Axel Springer AG acquired affiliate marketers Zanox and Digital Window as well as StepStone ASA. In 2010 a $635.7 million offer by Axel for leading French real estate website operator seloger.com caused seloger shares to rise as much as 32%, the most since it went public. Within 3 days Axel increased its offer 15.6% to $735 million after shareholders rejected the deal. \n\nIn 2012, Axel Springer formed a joint venture (Axel Springer Digital Classified) with global growth equity firm General Atlantic . The company also bought TotalJobs in the UK from Reed Elsevier that year. \n\nIn 2013, Springer sold its regional newspapers, women's magazines, and television magazines to Funke Mediengruppe for €920 million That same year, Publications Grand Public, a French magazine publisher owned by Springer, was sold to Reworld Media . The German television newsbroadcaster N24 was acquired by Axel Springer SE and combined with Die Welt . \n\nIn 2020, Friede Springer transferred $1.5 billion of Axel Springer shares to CEO Mathias Dopfner, effectively making him heir of the media group. Under the arrangement, Friede Springer sold a 4.1% stake to Dopfner and gifted him 15% more- bringing Dopfner’s direct stake of the company to 22%. She also transferred voting rights to Dopfner for her remaining 22% in the business. In October of the same year, the company expanded its Berlin headquarters with the completion of the Axel Springer Campus, a cube-shaped office building designed by Rem Koolhaas and OMA . \n\nIn October 2021, an article in The New York Times reported accusations of sexual misconduct, sexual discrimination and questionable business practices at Axel Springer SE. A day later, the publisher fired the editor-in-chief of Bild . \n\nIn July 2024, reports emerged that Axel Springer and private equity group KKR were in talks to potentially split the media conglomerate. The proposed deal would separate the group's media assets, including Politico, Business Insider, Bild, and Die Welt, from its digital classifieds operations such as StepStone and Aviv. The split was confirmed in September 2024 and Axel Springer became a fully privately owned and operated media company. \n\nIn September 2015, Axel Springer acquired Business Insider at a $442 million valuation. It purchased an additional 88% of the company for $343 million, bringing its total ownership to 97%. \n\nIn October 2020, Axel Springer and Insider Inc. acquired Morning Brew, a media startup that focuses on business newsletters and podcasts, for around $75 million. The Morning Brew brand remains fully intact post-deal, and the business will operate completely independently with Insider Inc. The company’s co-founders retain a sizeable minority stake and have an earn-out clause built into the deal. \n\nIn October 2021, the firm announced that it had completed the acquisition of Politico for over $1 billion, after announcing its intention to do so in late August 2021. Along with the deal, Axel Springer took full control of the Politico Europe partnership launched in 2014, as well as the technology news site Protocol, which was launched in 2020. \n\nThe company previously held shares in aufeminin.com and buy.at . It was also a significant investor in the American digital media company Group Nine Media , before it was acquired by Vox Media. \n\nGudrun Kruip, a scholar associated with the Stiftung Bundespräsident-Theodor-Heuss-Haus , has claimed that Axel Springer SE, along with its subsidiaries, exhibits a pro-American stance, often omitting criticism of US foreign policy. This observation is then backed by allegations made by two former CIA officers in an interview with The Nation , claiming that Axel Springer received $7 million from the CIA. The purpose of this funding, they allege, was to influence the publisher to align its editorial content with American geopolitical interests. Although no conclusive evidence has come to light, Springer's admission in his autobiography regarding the financial challenges faced at the outset of his publishing venture, suggesting the necessity of external funding for the company's rapid growth led Kruip to believe that the allegations of CIA financial support are credible. As of 2001, the Axel Springer SE names \"solidarity with the libertarian values of the United States of America\" as one of its core principles on its website. This explicit stance has led to critiques from scholars and independent observers regarding the company's perceived alignment with American interests. Furthermore, an article in Foreign Policy has critiqued Axel Springer SE for a history of compromising journalistic ethics to support right-wing causes, implying a longstanding pattern of bias in its publications. \n\nUpon acquisition of Insider in 2015, and again in 2021 with Politico, Mathias Döpfner allegedly stated that staff would need to adhere to Axel Springer's principles, including support for a united Europe, \"reconciliation between Germans and Jews\" and Israel's right to exist and a free-market economy, and that staff who disagree with the principles \"should not work for Axel Springer, very clearly\". In an interview with New York Magazine, Döpfner emphasized that Axel Springer's commitment to these core principles, particularly the right of Israel to exist, stems from Germany's historical context rather than activism. He claimed that while Springer employees in Germany are required to support these values, American employees are not asked to sign such a pledge. He also insists that journalistic integrity remains paramount, clarifying that the company's stance does not equate to uncritical support of Israel, but recognizes its right to exist in light of historical threats. \n\nIn 2017, Mark Dekan of Ringier Axel Springer Polska expressed support for European unity and the role of free media in a letter to employees, amidst political debates in Poland. His comments, which included criticism of Jarosław Kaczyński , and highlighted the company's values and the importance of European integration, especially among younger Poles, was interpreted by critics as editorial interference. \n\nIn March 2021, Der Spiegel reported accusations that the editor of Bild, Julian Reichelt , had promoted several young female employees in exchange for sex and sought to buy their silence before dismissing them. This was followed up by a similar report in the New York Times in October 2021. These allegations were investigated by Axel Springer, which initially supported Reichelt. However, following further scrutiny, the company ultimately decided to dismiss him. \n\nLiz Fekete criticized Axel Springer-owned Welt and Axel Springer CEO Mathias Döpfner in 2024 for their anti-Muslim and anti-Palestinian bias, suggesting falsely that Muslim immigrants are the main source of antisemitism , ignoring that the majority of antisemitic incidents are actually caused by the far-right . She also criticized the company for uncritically adopting Israel's talking points on the Middle East conflict , to the disadvantage of Palestinians . \n\nAxel Springer has also been accused of making profits from illegal settlements in the Occupied Palestinian territories . Axel Springer’s Israeli classified ads website Yad2 is the largest classifieds site in Israel. The website publishes real estate listings across Israel, including rental apartments and sales in Israeli settlements that are considered illegal under international law. While private users can use the website for free, business users have to pay and many a times these real estate brokers and agents are selling or renting properties in illegal settlements. \n\nGerman public broadcasting criticized Axel Springer in 2024 for taking their pro-Israel mission too far and that they therefore believe Palestinians and anyone who expresses criticism of Israel “must be discredited and then written against”, especially criticizing it for a news report which doxed and discredited several pro-Palestinian student protesters. \n\nMajor competitors in the German publishing market include Bauer Media Group , Bertelsmann , Hubert Burda Media , and Holtzbrinck . On a global scale, some of the key competitors of Axel Springer include other large multinational media companies such as News Corporation, Time Warner, and The New York Times Company. These companies operate in a variety of different media sectors, including print, television, and digital, and are all major players in the global media industry. In addition to traditional media companies, Axel Springer also competes with a number of digital media platforms and companies, such as Google, Facebook, and Apple, which have become increasingly influential in the media industry in recent years. These companies have disrupted the traditional media business model by offering new ways for people to access news and information, and have posed a significant challenge to traditional media companies like Axel Springer.",
  "Ethics is the philosophical study of moral phenomena. Also called moral philosophy , it investigates normative questions about what people ought to do or which behavior is morally right. Its main branches include normative ethics , applied ethics , and metaethics .\n\nNormative ethics aims to find general principles that govern how people should act. Applied ethics examines concrete ethical problems in real-life situations, such as abortion , treatment of animals , and business practices . Metaethics explores the underlying assumptions and concepts of ethics. It asks whether there are objective moral facts, how moral knowledge is possible, and how moral judgments motivate people. Influential normative theories are consequentialism , deontology , and virtue ethics . According to consequentialists, an act is right if it leads to the best consequences. Deontologists focus on acts themselves, saying that they must adhere to duties , like telling the truth and keeping promises. Virtue ethics sees the manifestation of virtues , like courage and compassion , as the fundamental principle of morality.\n\nEthics is closely connected to value theory , which studies the nature and types of value , like the contrast between intrinsic and instrumental value . Moral psychology is a related empirical field and investigates psychological processes involved in morality, such as reasoning and the formation of character . Descriptive ethics describes the dominant moral codes and beliefs in different societies and considers their historical dimension.\n\nThe history of ethics started in the ancient period with the development of ethical principles and theories in ancient Egypt , India , China , and Greece . This period saw the emergence of ethical teachings associated with Hinduism , Buddhism , Confucianism , Daoism , and contributions of philosophers like Socrates and Aristotle . During the medieval period , ethical thought was strongly influenced by religious teachings. In the modern period , this focus shifted to a more secular approach concerned with moral experience, reasons for acting , and the consequences of actions. An influential development in the 20th century was the emergence of metaethics.\n\nEthics, also called moral philosophy, is the study of moral phenomena. It is one of the main branches of philosophy and investigates the nature of morality and the principles that govern the moral evaluation of conduct , character traits , and institutions . It examines what obligations people have, what behavior is right and wrong, and how to lead a good life. Some of its key questions are \"How should one live?\" and \"What gives meaning to life ?\". In contemporary philosophy, ethics is usually divided into normative ethics , applied ethics , and metaethics . \n\nMorality is about what people ought to do rather than what they actually do, what they want to do, or what social conventions require. As a rational and systematic field of inquiry, ethics studies practical reasons why people should act one way rather than another. Most ethical theories seek universal principles that express a general standpoint of what is objectively right and wrong. In a slightly different sense, the term ethics can also refer to individual ethical theories in the form of a rational system of moral principles, such as Aristotelian ethics , and to a moral code that certain societies, social groups, or professions follow, as in Protestant work ethic and medical ethics . \n\nThe English word ethics has its roots in the Ancient Greek word êthos ( ἦθος ), meaning ' character ' and ' personal disposition ' . This word gave rise to the Ancient Greek word ēthikós ( ἠθικός ), which was translated into Latin as ethica and entered the English language in the 15th century through the Old French term éthique . The term morality originates in the Latin word moralis , meaning ' manners ' and ' character ' . It was introduced into the English language during the Middle English period through the Old French term moralité . \n\nThe terms ethics and morality are usually used interchangeably but some philosophers distinguish between the two. According to one view, morality focuses on what moral obligations people have while ethics is broader and includes ideas about what is good and how to lead a meaningful life. Another difference is that codes of conduct in specific areas, such as business and environment, are usually termed ethics rather than morality, as in business ethics and environmental ethics . \n\nNormative ethics is the philosophical study of ethical conduct and investigates the fundamental principles of morality . It aims to discover and justify general answers to questions like \"How should one live?\" and \"How should people act?\", usually in the form of universal or domain-independent principles that determine whether an act is right or wrong. For example, given the particular impression that it is wrong to set a child on fire for fun, normative ethics aims to find more general principles that explain why this is the case, like the principle that one should not cause extreme suffering to the innocent , which may itself be explained in terms of a more general principle. Many theories of normative ethics also aim to guide behavior by helping people make moral decisions . \n\nTheories in normative ethics state how people should act or what kind of behavior is correct. They do not aim to describe how people normally act, what moral beliefs ordinary people have, how these beliefs change over time, or what ethical codes are upheld in certain social groups. These topics belong to descriptive ethics and are studied in fields like anthropology , sociology , and history rather than normative ethics. \n\nSome systems of normative ethics arrive at a single principle covering all possible cases. Others encompass a small set of basic rules that address all or at least the most important moral considerations. One difficulty for systems with several basic principles is that these principles may conflict with each other in some cases and lead to ethical dilemmas . \n\nDistinct theories in normative ethics suggest different principles as the foundation of morality. The three most influential schools of thought are consequentialism , deontology , and virtue ethics . These schools are usually presented as exclusive alternatives, but depending on how they are defined, they can overlap and do not necessarily exclude one another. In some cases, they differ in which acts they see as right or wrong. In other cases, they recommend the same course of action but provide different justifications for why it is right. \n\nConsequentialism, also called teleological ethics, [ a ] says that morality depends on consequences. According to the most common view, an act is right if it brings the best future. This means that there is no alternative course of action that has better consequences. A key aspect of consequentialist theories is that they provide a characterization of what is good and then define what is right in terms of what is good. For example, classical utilitarianism says that pleasure is good and that the action leading to the most overall pleasure is right. Consequentialism has been discussed indirectly since the formulation of classical utilitarianism in the late 18th century. A more explicit analysis of this view happened in the 20th century, when the term was coined by G. E. M. Anscombe . \n\nConsequentialists usually understand the consequences of an action in a very wide sense that includes the totality of its effects. This is based on the idea that actions make a difference in the world by bringing about a causal chain of events that would not have existed otherwise. A core intuition behind consequentialism is that the future should be shaped to achieve the best possible outcome. \n\nThe act itself is usually not seen as part of the consequences. This means that if an act has intrinsic value or disvalue, it is not included as a factor. Some consequentialists see this as a flaw, saying that all value-relevant factors need to be considered. They try to avoid this complication by including the act itself as part of the consequences. A related approach is to characterize consequentialism not in terms of consequences but in terms of outcome, with the outcome being defined as the act together with its consequences. \n\nMost forms of consequentialism are agent-neutral. This means that the value of consequences is assessed from a neutral perspective, that is, acts should have consequences that are good in general and not just good for the agent. It is controversial whether agent-relative moral theories, like ethical egoism , should be considered as types of consequentialism. \n\nThere are many different types of consequentialism. They differ based on what type of entity they evaluate, what consequences they take into consideration, and how they determine the value of consequences. Most theories assess the moral value of acts. However, consequentialism can also be used to evaluate motives , character traits , rules, and policies . \n\nMany types assess the value of consequences based on whether they promote happiness or suffering. But there are also alternative evaluative principles, such as desire satisfaction, autonomy , freedom , knowledge , friendship , beauty , and self-perfection. Some forms of consequentialism hold that there is only a single source of value . The most prominent among them is classical utilitarianism , which states that the moral value of acts only depends on the pleasure and suffering they cause. An alternative approach says that there are many different sources of value, which all contribute to one overall value. Before the 20th century, consequentialists were only concerned with the total of value or the aggregate good. In the 20th century, alternative views were developed that additionally consider the distribution of value. One of them states that an equal distribution of goods is better than an unequal distribution even if the aggregate good is the same. \n\nThere are disagreements about which consequences should be assessed. An important distinction is between act consequentialism and rule consequentialism. According to act consequentialism, the consequences of an act determine its moral value. This means that there is a direct relation between the consequences of an act and its moral value. Rule consequentialism, by contrast, holds that an act is right if it follows a certain set of rules. Rule consequentialism determines the best rules by considering their outcomes at a community level. People should follow the rules that lead to the best consequences when everyone in the community follows them. This implies that the relation between an act and its consequences is indirect. For example, if telling the truth is one of the best rules, then according to rule consequentialism, a person should tell the truth even in specific cases where lying would lead to better consequences. \n\nAnother disagreement is between actual and expected consequentialism. According to the traditional view, only the actual consequences of an act affect its moral value. One difficulty of this view is that many consequences cannot be known in advance. This means that in some cases, even well-planned and intentioned acts are morally wrong if they inadvertently lead to negative outcomes. An alternative perspective states that what matters are not the actual consequences but the expected consequences. This view takes into account that when deciding what to do, people have to rely on their limited knowledge of the total consequences of their actions. According to this view, a course of action has positive moral value despite leading to an overall negative outcome if it had the highest expected value , for example, because the negative outcome could not be anticipated or was unlikely. \n\nA further difference is between maximizing and satisficing consequentialism. According to maximizing consequentialism, only the best possible act is morally permitted. This means that acts with positive consequences are wrong if there are alternatives with even better consequences. One criticism of maximizing consequentialism is that it demands too much by requiring that people do significantly more than they are socially expected to. For example, if the best action for someone with a good salary would be to donate 70% of their income to charity, it would be morally wrong for them to only donate 65%. Satisficing consequentialism, by contrast, only requires that an act is \"good enough\" even if it is not the best possible alternative. According to this view, it is possible to do more than one is morally required to do. [ b ]\n\nMohism in ancient Chinese philosophy is one of the earliest forms of consequentialism. It arose in the 5th century BCE and argued that political action should promote justice as a means to increase the welfare of the people. \n\nThe most well-known form of consequentialism is utilitarianism. In its classical form, it is an act consequentialism that sees happiness as the only source of intrinsic value. This means that an act is morally right if it produces \"the greatest good for the greatest number\" by increasing happiness and reducing suffering. Utilitarians do not deny that other things also have value, like health, friendship, and knowledge. However, they deny that these things have intrinsic value. Instead, they say that they have extrinsic value because they affect happiness and suffering. In this regard, they are desirable as a means but, unlike happiness, not as an end. The view that pleasure is the only thing with intrinsic value is called ethical or evaluative hedonism . \n\nClassical utilitarianism was initially formulated by Jeremy Bentham at the end of the 18th century and further developed by John Stuart Mill . Bentham introduced the hedonic calculus to assess the value of consequences. Two key aspects of the hedonic calculus are the intensity and the duration of pleasure. According to this view, a pleasurable experience has a high value if it has a high intensity and lasts for a long time. A common criticism of Bentham's utilitarianism argued that its focus on the intensity of pleasure promotes an immoral lifestyle centered around indulgence in sensory gratification. Mill responded to this criticism by distinguishing between higher and lower pleasures. He stated that higher pleasures, like the intellectual satisfaction of reading a book, are more valuable than lower pleasures, like the sensory enjoyment of food and drink, even if their intensity and duration are the same. Since its original formulation, many variations of utilitarianism have developed, including the difference between act and rule utilitarianism and between maximizing and satisficing utilitarianism. \n\nDeontology assesses the moral rightness of actions based on a set of norms or principles. These norms describe the requirements that all actions need to follow. They may include principles like telling the truth, keeping promises , and not intentionally harming others. Unlike consequentialists, deontologists hold that the validity of general moral principles does not directly depend on their consequences. They state that these principles should be followed in every case since they express how actions are inherently right or wrong. According to moral philosopher David Ross , it is wrong to break a promise even if no harm comes from it. Deontologists are interested in which actions are right and often allow that there is a gap between what is right and what is good. Many focus on prohibitions and describe which acts are forbidden under any circumstances. \n\nAgent-centered deontological theories focus on the person who acts and the duties they have. Agent-centered theories often focus on the motives and intentions behind people's actions, highlighting the importance of acting for the right reasons. They tend to be agent-relative, meaning that the reasons for which people should act depend on personal circumstances. For example, a parent has a special obligation to their child, while a stranger does not have this kind of obligation toward a child they do not know. Patient-centered theories, by contrast, focus on the people affected by actions and the rights they have. An example is the requirement to treat other people as ends and not merely as a means to an end. This requirement can be used to argue, for example, that it is wrong to kill a person against their will even if this act would save the lives of several others. Patient-centered deontological theories are usually agent-neutral, meaning that they apply equally to everyone in a situation, regardless of their specific role or position. \n\nImmanuel Kant (1724–1804) is one of the most well-known deontologists. He states that reaching outcomes that people desire, such as being happy, is not the main purpose of moral actions. Instead, he argues that there are universal principles that apply to everyone independent of their desires. He uses the term categorical imperative for these principles, saying that they have their source in the structure of practical reason and are true for all rational agents. According to Kant, to act morally is to act in agreement with reason as expressed by these principles while violating them is both immoral and irrational. \n\nKant provided several formulations of the categorical imperative. One formulation says that a person should only follow maxims [ c ] that can be universalized . This means that the person would want everyone to follow the same maxim as a universal law applicable to everyone. Another formulation states that one should treat other people always as ends in themselves and never as mere means to an end. This formulation focuses on respecting and valuing other people for their own sake rather than using them in the pursuit of personal goals. \n\nIn either case, Kant says that what matters is to have a good will. A person has a good will if they respect the moral law and form their intentions and motives in agreement with it. Kant states that actions motivated in such a way are unconditionally good, meaning that they are good even in cases where they result in undesirable consequences. \n\nDivine command theory says that God is the source of morality. It states that moral laws are divine commands and that to act morally is to obey and follow God's will . While all divine command theorists agree that morality depends on God, there are disagreements about the precise content of the divine commands, and theorists belonging to different religions tend to propose different moral laws. For example, Christian and Jewish divine command theorists may argue that the Ten Commandments express God's will while Muslims may reserve this role for the teachings of the Quran . \n\nContractualists reject the reference to God as the source of morality and argue instead that morality is based on an explicit or implicit social contract between humans. They state that actual or hypothetical consent to this contract is the source of moral norms and duties. To determine which duties people have, contractualists often rely on a thought experiment about what rational people under ideal circumstances would agree on. For example, if they would agree that people should not lie then there is a moral obligation to refrain from lying. Because it relies on consent, contractualism is often understood as a patient-centered form of deontology. [ d ] Famous social contract theorists include Thomas Hobbes , John Locke , Jean-Jacques Rousseau , and John Rawls . \n\nDiscourse ethics also focuses on social agreement on moral norms but says that this agreement is based on communicative rationality . It aims to arrive at moral norms for pluralistic modern societies that encompass a diversity of viewpoints. A universal moral norm is seen as valid if all rational discourse participants do or would approve. This way, morality is not imposed by a single moral authority but arises from the moral discourse within society. This discourse should aim to establish an ideal speech situation to ensure fairness and inclusivity. In particular, this means that discourse participants are free to voice their different opinions without coercion but are at the same time required to justify them using rational argumentation. \n\nThe main concern of virtue ethics is how virtues are expressed in actions. As such, it is neither directly interested in the consequences of actions nor in universal moral duties. Virtues are positive character traits like honesty , courage , kindness , and compassion . They are usually understood as dispositions to feel, decide, and act in a certain manner by being wholeheartedly committed to this manner. Virtues contrast with vices , which are their harmful counterparts. \n\nVirtue theorists usually say that the mere possession of virtues by itself is not sufficient. Instead, people should manifest virtues in their actions. An important factor is the practical wisdom, also called phronesis , of knowing when, how, and which virtue to express. For example, a lack of practical wisdom may lead courageous people to perform morally wrong actions by taking unnecessary risks that should better be avoided. \n\nDifferent types of virtue ethics differ on how they understand virtues and their role in practical life. Eudaimonism is the original form of virtue theory developed in Ancient Greek philosophy and draws a close relation between virtuous behavior and happiness. It states that people flourish by living a virtuous life. Eudaimonist theories often hold that virtues are positive potentials residing in human nature and that actualizing these potentials results in leading a good and happy life. Agent-based theories, by contrast, see happiness only as a side effect and focus instead on the admirable traits and motivational characteristics expressed while acting. This is often combined with the idea that one can learn from exceptional individuals what those characteristics are. Feminist ethics of care are another form of virtue ethics. They emphasize the importance of interpersonal relationships and say that benevolence by caring for the well-being of others is one of the key virtues. \n\nInfluential schools of virtue ethics in ancient philosophy were Aristotelianism and Stoicism . According to Aristotle (384–322 BCE), each virtue [ e ] is a golden mean between two types of vices: excess and deficiency. For example, courage is a virtue that lies between the deficient state of cowardice and the excessive state of recklessness . Aristotle held that virtuous action leads to happiness and makes people flourish in life. Stoicism emerged about 300 BCE and taught that, through virtue alone, people can achieve happiness characterized by a peaceful state of mind free from emotional disturbances. The Stoics advocated rationality and self-mastery to achieve this state. In the 20th century, virtue ethics experienced a resurgence thanks to philosophers such as Elizabeth Anscombe , Philippa Foot , Alasdair MacIntyre , and Martha Nussbaum . \n\nThere are many other schools of normative ethics in addition to the three main traditions. Pragmatist ethics focuses on the role of practice and holds that one of the key tasks of ethics is to solve practical problems in concrete situations. It has certain similarities to utilitarianism and its focus on consequences but concentrates more on how morality is embedded in and relative to social and cultural contexts. Pragmatists tend to give more importance to habits than to conscious deliberation and understand morality as a habit that should be shaped in the right way. \n\nPostmodern ethics agrees with pragmatist ethics about the cultural relativity of morality. It rejects the idea that there are objective moral principles that apply universally to all cultures and traditions. It asserts that there is no one coherent ethical code since morality itself is irrational and humans are morally ambivalent beings. Postmodern ethics instead focuses on how moral demands arise in specific situations as one encounters other people. \n\nEthical egoism is the view that people should act in their self-interest or that an action is morally right if the person acts for their own benefit. It differs from psychological egoism , which states that people actually follow their self-interest without claiming that they should do so. Ethical egoists may act in agreement with commonly accepted moral expectations and benefit other people, for example, by keeping promises, helping friends, and cooperating with others. However, they do so only as a means to promote their self-interest. Ethical egoism is often criticized as an immoral and contradictory position. \n\nNormative ethics has a central place in most religions . Key aspects of Jewish ethics are to follow the 613 commandments of God according to the Mitzvah duty found in the Torah and to take responsibility for societal welfare . Christian ethics puts less emphasis on following precise laws and teaches instead the practice of selfless love , such as the Great Commandment to \"Love your neighbor as yourself\". The Five Pillars of Islam constitute a basic framework of Muslim ethics and focus on the practice of faith , prayer , charity , fasting during Ramadan , and pilgrimage to Mecca . \n\nBuddhists emphasize the importance of compassion and loving-kindness towards all sentient entities. A similar outlook is found in Jainism , which has non-violence as its principal virtue. Duty is a central aspect of Hindu ethics and is about fulfilling social obligations, which may vary depending on a person's social class and stage of life . Confucianism places great emphasis on harmony in society and sees benevolence as a key virtue. Taoism extends the importance of living in harmony to the whole world and teaches that people should practice effortless action by following the natural flow of the universe . Indigenous belief systems, like Native American philosophy and the African Ubuntu philosophy , often emphasize the interconnectedness of all living beings and the environment while stressing the importance of living in harmony with nature. \n\nMetaethics is the branch of ethics that examines the nature, foundations, and scope of moral judgments , concepts, and values. It is not interested in which actions are right but in what it means for an action to be right and whether moral judgments are objective and can be true at all. It further examines the meaning of morality and other moral terms. Metaethics is a metatheory that operates on a higher level of abstraction than normative ethics by investigating its underlying assumptions. Metaethical theories typically do not directly judge which normative ethical theories are correct. However, metaethical theories can still influence normative theories by examining their foundational principles. \n\nMetaethics overlaps with various branches of philosophy. On the level of ontology , [ f ] it examines whether there are objective moral facts. Concerning semantics , it asks what the meaning of moral terms are and whether moral statements have a truth value . The epistemological side of metaethics discusses whether and how people can acquire moral knowledge. Metaethics overlaps with psychology because of its interest in how moral judgments motivate people to act. It also overlaps with anthropology since it aims to explain how cross-cultural differences affect moral assessments. \n\nMetaethics examines basic ethical concepts and their relations. Ethics is primarily concerned with normative statements about what ought to be the case, in contrast to descriptive statements , which are about what is the case. [ g ] Duties and obligations express requirements of what people ought to do. Duties are sometimes defined as counterparts of the rights that always accompany them. According to this view, someone has a duty to benefit another person if this other person has the right to receive that benefit. \n\nObligation and permission are contrasting terms that can be defined through each other: to be obligated to do something means that one is not permitted not to do it and to be permitted to do something means that one is not obligated not to do it. [ h ] Some theorists define obligations in terms of values or what is good . When used in a general sense, good contrasts with bad . When describing people and their intentions, the term evil rather than bad is often employed. \n\nObligations are used to assess the moral status of actions, motives , and character traits . An action is morally right if it is in tune with a person's obligations and morally wrong if it violates them. Supererogation is a special moral status that applies to cases in which the agent does more than is morally required of them. To be morally responsible for an action usually means that the person possesses and exercises certain capacities or some form of control . [ i ] If a person is morally responsible then it is appropriate to respond to them in certain ways, for example, by praising or blaming them. \n\nA major debate in metaethics is about the ontological status of morality, questioning whether ethical values and principles are real. It examines whether moral properties exist as objective features independent of the human mind and culture rather than as subjective constructs or expressions of personal preferences and cultural norms . \n\nMoral realists accept the claim that there are objective moral facts. This view implies that moral values are mind-independent aspects of reality and that there is an absolute fact about whether a given action is right or wrong. A consequence of this view is that moral requirements have the same ontological status as non-moral facts: it is an objective fact whether there is an obligation to keep a promise just as it is an objective fact whether a thing is rectangular. Moral realism is often associated with the claim that there are universal ethical principles that apply equally to everyone. It implies that if two people disagree about a moral evaluation then at least one of them is wrong. This observation is sometimes taken as an argument against moral realism since moral disagreement is widespread in most fields. \n\nMoral relativists reject the idea that morality is an objective feature of reality. They argue instead that moral principles are human inventions. This means that a behavior is not objectively right or wrong but only subjectively right or wrong relative to a certain standpoint. Moral standpoints may differ between persons, cultures, and historical periods. For example, moral statements like \"Slavery is wrong\" or \"Suicide is permissible\" may be true in one culture and false in another. [ j ] Some moral relativists say that moral systems are constructed to serve certain goals such as social coordination. According to this view, different societies and different social groups within a society construct different moral systems based on their diverging purposes. Emotivism provides a different explanation, stating that morality arises from moral emotions, which are not the same for everyone. \n\nMoral nihilists deny the existence of moral facts. They reject the existence of both objective moral facts defended by moral realism and subjective moral facts defended by moral relativism. They believe that the basic assumptions underlying moral claims are misguided. Some moral nihilists conclude from this that anything is allowed. A slightly different view emphasizes that moral nihilism is not itself a moral position about what is allowed and prohibited but the rejection of any moral position. Moral nihilism, like moral relativism, recognizes that people judge actions as right or wrong from different perspectives. However, it disagrees that this practice involves morality and sees it as just one type of human behavior. \n\nA central disagreement among moral realists is between naturalism and non-naturalism. Naturalism states that moral properties are natural properties accessible to empirical observation . They are similar to the natural properties investigated by the natural sciences , like color and shape. Some moral naturalists hold that moral properties are a unique and basic type of natural property. [ k ] Another view states that moral properties are real but not a fundamental part of reality and can be reduced to other natural properties, such as properties describing the causes of pleasure and pain . \n\nNon-naturalism argues that moral properties form part of reality and that moral features are not identical or reducible to natural properties. This view is usually motivated by the idea that moral properties are unique because they express what should be the case. Proponents of this position often emphasize this uniqueness by claiming that it is a fallacy to define ethics in terms of natural entities or to infer prescriptive from descriptive statements. \n\nThe metaethical debate between cognitivism and non-cognitivism is about the meaning of moral statements and is a part of the study of semantics. According to cognitivism, moral statements like \"Abortion is morally wrong\" and \"Going to war is never morally justified\" are truth-apt, meaning that they all have a truth value: they are either true or false. Cognitivism claims that moral statements have a truth value but is not interested in which truth value they have. It is often seen as the default position since moral statements resemble other statements, like \"Abortion is a medical procedure\" or \"Going to war is a political decision\", which have a truth value. \n\nThere is a close relation between the semantic theory of cognitivism and the ontological theory of moral realism. Moral realists assert that moral facts exist. This can be used to explain why moral statements are true or false: a statement is true if it is consistent with the facts and false otherwise. As a result, philosophers who accept one theory often accept the other as well. An exception is error theory , which combines cognitivism with moral nihilism by claiming that all moral statements are false because there are no moral facts. \n\nNon-cognitivism is the view that moral statements lack a truth value. According to this view, the statement \"Murder is wrong\" is neither true nor false. Some non-cognitivists claim that moral statements have no meaning at all. A different interpretation is that they have another type of meaning. Emotivism says that they articulate emotional attitudes. According to this view, the statement \"Murder is wrong\" expresses that the speaker has a negative moral attitude towards murder or disapproves of it. Prescriptivism , by contrast, understands moral statements as commands . According to this view, stating that \"Murder is wrong\" expresses a command like \"Do not commit murder\". \n\nThe epistemology of ethics studies whether or how one can know moral truths. Foundationalist views state that some moral beliefs are basic and do not require further justification. Ethical intuitionism is one such view that says that humans have a special cognitive faculty through which they can know right from wrong. Intuitionists often argue that general moral truths, like \"Lying is wrong\", are self-evident and that it is possible to know them without relying on empirical experience . A different foundationalist position focuses on particular observations rather than general intuitions. It says that if people are confronted with a concrete moral situation, they can perceive whether right or wrong conduct was involved. \n\nIn contrast to foundationalists, coherentists say that there are no basic moral beliefs. They argue that beliefs form a complex network and mutually support and justify one another. According to this view, a moral belief can only amount to knowledge if it coheres with the rest of the beliefs in the network. Moral skeptics say that people are unable to distinguish between right and wrong behavior, thereby rejecting the idea that moral knowledge is possible. A common objection by critics of moral skepticism asserts that it leads to immoral behavior. \n\nThought experiments are used as a method in ethics to decide between competing theories. They usually present an imagined situation involving an ethical dilemma and explore how people's intuitions of right and wrong change based on specific details in that situation. For example, in Philippa Foot 's trolley problem , a person can flip a switch to redirect a trolley from one track to another, thereby sacrificing the life of one person to save five. This scenario explores how the difference between doing and allowing harm affects moral obligations. Another thought experiment, proposed by Judith Jarvis Thomson , examines the moral implications of abortion by imagining a situation in which a person gets connected without their consent to an ill violinist . In this scenario, the violinist dies if the connection is severed, similar to how a fetus dies in the case of abortion. The thought experiment explores whether it would be morally permissible to sever the connection within the next nine months. \n\nOn the level of psychology, metaethics is interested in how moral beliefs and experiences affect behavior. According to motivational internalists , there is a direct link between moral judgments and action. This means that every judgment about what is right motivates the person to act accordingly. For example, Socrates defends a strong form of motivational internalism by holding that a person can only perform an evil deed if they are unaware that it is evil. Weaker forms of motivational internalism say that people can act against their own moral judgments, for example, because of the weakness of the will . Motivational externalists accept that people can judge an act to be morally required without feeling a reason to engage in it. This means that moral judgments do not always provide motivational force. A closely related question is whether moral judgments can provide motivation on their own or need to be accompanied by other mental states , such as a desire to act morally. \n\nApplied ethics, also known as practical ethics, is the branch of ethics and applied philosophy that examines concrete moral problems encountered in real-life situations. Unlike normative ethics, it is not concerned with discovering or justifying universal ethical principles. Instead, it studies how those principles can be applied to specific domains of practical life, what consequences they have in these fields, and whether additional domain-specific factors need to be considered. \n\nOne of the main challenges of applied ethics is to breach the gap between abstract universal theories and their application to concrete situations. For example, an in-depth understanding of Kantianism or utilitarianism is usually not sufficient to decide how to analyze the moral implications of a medical procedure like abortion. One reason is that it may not be clear how the Kantian requirement of respecting everyone's personhood applies to a fetus or, from a utilitarian perspective, what the long-term consequences are in terms of the greatest good for the greatest number. This difficulty is particularly relevant to applied ethicists who employ a top-down methodology by starting from universal ethical principles and applying them to particular cases within a specific domain. A different approach is to use a bottom-up methodology, known as casuistry . This method does not start from universal principles but from moral intuitions about particular cases. It seeks to arrive at moral principles relevant to a specific domain, which may not be applicable to other domains. In either case, inquiry into applied ethics is often triggered by ethical dilemmas in which a person is subject to conflicting moral requirements. \n\nApplied ethics covers issues belonging to both the private sphere , like right conduct in the family and close relationships, and the public sphere , like moral problems posed by new technologies and duties toward future generations. Major branches include bioethics , business ethics , and professional ethics . There are many other branches, and their domains of inquiry often overlap. \n\nBioethics covers moral problems associated with living organisms and biological disciplines. A key problem in bioethics is how features such as consciousness , being able to feel pleasure and pain, rationality , and personhood affect the moral status of entities. These differences concern, for example, how to treat non-living entities like rocks and non-sentient entities like plants in contrast to animals, and whether humans have a different moral status than other animals. According to anthropocentrism , only humans have a basic moral status. This suggests that all other entities possess a derivative moral status only insofar as they impact human life. Sentientism , by contrast, extends an inherent moral status to all sentient beings. Further positions include biocentrism , which also covers non-sentient lifeforms, and ecocentrism , which states that all of nature has a basic moral status. \n\nBioethics is relevant to various aspects of life and many professions. It covers a wide range of moral problems associated with topics like abortion , cloning , stem cell research , euthanasia , suicide , animal testing , intensive animal farming , nuclear waste , and air pollution . \n\nBioethics can be divided into medical ethics , animal ethics , and environmental ethics based on whether the ethical problems relate to humans, other animals, or nature in general. Medical ethics is the oldest branch of bioethics. The Hippocratic Oath is one of the earliest texts to engage in medical ethics by establishing ethical guidelines for medical practitioners like a prohibition to harm the patient . Medical ethics often addresses issues related to the start and end of life. It examines the moral status of fetuses, for example, whether they are full-fledged persons and whether abortion is a form of murder . Ethical issues also arise about whether a person has the right to end their life in cases of terminal illness or chronic suffering and if doctors may help them do so . Other topics in medical ethics include medical confidentiality , informed consent , research on human beings, organ transplantation , and access to healthcare . \n\nAnimal ethics examines how humans should treat other animals. This field often emphasizes the importance of animal welfare while arguing that humans should avoid or minimize the harm done to animals. There is wide agreement that it is wrong to torture animals for fun. The situation is more complicated in cases where harm is inflicted on animals as a side effect of the pursuit of human interests. This happens, for example, during factory farming, when using animals as food, and for research experiments on animals. A key topic in animal ethics is the formulation of animal rights . Animal rights theorists assert that animals have a certain moral status and that humans should respect this status when interacting with them. Examples of suggested animal rights include the right to life, the right to be free from unnecessary suffering, and the right to natural behavior in a suitable environment. \n\nEnvironmental ethics deals with moral problems relating to the natural environment including animals, plants, natural resources , and ecosystems . In its widest sense, it covers the whole cosmos . In the domain of agriculture , this concerns the circumstances under which the vegetation of an area may be cleared to use it for farming and the implications of planting genetically modified crops . On a wider scale, environmental ethics addresses the problem of global warming and people's responsibility on the individual and collective levels , including topics like climate justice and duties towards future generations. Environmental ethicists often promote sustainable practices and policies directed at protecting and conserving ecosystems and biodiversity . \n\nBusiness ethics examines the moral implications of business conduct and how ethical principles apply to corporations and organizations. A key topic is corporate social responsibility , which is the responsibility of corporations to act in a manner that benefits society at large. Corporate social responsibility is a complex issue since many stakeholders are directly and indirectly involved in corporate decisions, such as the CEO , the board of directors , and the shareholders . A closely related topic is the question of whether corporations themselves, and not just their stakeholders, have moral agency. Business ethics further examines the role of honesty and fairness in business practices as well as the moral implications of bribery , conflict of interest , protection of investors and consumers, worker's rights , ethical leadership , and corporate philanthropy . \n\nProfessional ethics is a closely related field that studies ethical principles applying to members of a specific profession , like engineers , medical doctors , lawyers , and teachers . It is a diverse field since different professions often have different responsibilities. Principles applying to many professions include that the professional has the required expertise for the intended work and that they have personal integrity and are trustworthy. Further principles are to serve the interest of their target group, follow client confidentiality , and respect and uphold the client's rights, such as informed consent. More precise requirements often vary between professions. A cornerstone of engineering ethics is to protect public safety, health, and well-being. Legal ethics emphasizes the importance of respect for justice, personal integrity, and confidentiality. Key factors in journalism ethics include accuracy, truthfulness, independence, and impartiality as well as proper attribution to avoid plagiarism . \n\nMany other fields of applied ethics are discussed in the academic literature. Communication ethics covers moral principles of communicative conduct . Two key issues in it are freedom of speech and speech responsibility. Freedom of speech concerns the ability to articulate one's opinions and ideas without the threats of punishment and censorship. Speech responsibility is about being accountable for the consequences of communicative action and inaction. A closely related field is information ethics , which focuses on the moral implications of creating, controlling, disseminating, and using information . \n\nThe ethics of technology examines the moral issues associated with the creation and use of any artifact, from simple spears to high-tech computers and nanotechnology . Central topics in the ethics of technology include the risks associated with creating new technologies, their responsible use, and questions about human enhancement through technological means, such as performance-enhancing drugs and genetic enhancement . Important subfields include computer ethics , ethics of artificial intelligence , machine ethics , ethics of nanotechnology , and nuclear ethics . \n\nThe ethics of war investigates moral problems of war and violent conflicts. According to just war theory , waging war is morally justified if it fulfills certain conditions. These conditions are commonly divided into requirements concerning the cause to initiate violent activities , such as self-defense, and the way those violent activities are conducted , such as avoiding excessive harm to civilians in the pursuit of legitimate military targets . Military ethics is a closely related field that is interested in the conduct of military personnel . It governs questions of the circumstances under which they are permitted to kill enemies, destroy infrastructure, and put the lives of their own troops at risk. Additional topics are the recruitment, training, and discharge of military personnel. \n\nOther fields of applied ethics include political ethics , which examines the moral dimensions of political decisions, educational ethics, which covers ethical issues related to proper teaching practices, and sexual ethics , which addresses the moral implications of sexual behavior . \n\nValue theory, also called axiology, [ l ] is the philosophical study of value. It examines the nature and types of value. A central distinction is between intrinsic and instrumental value . An entity has intrinsic value if it is good in itself or good for its own sake. An entity has instrumental value if it is valuable as a means to something else, for example, by causing something that has intrinsic value. Other topics include what kinds of things have value and how valuable they are. For instance, axiological hedonists say that pleasure is the only source of intrinsic value and that the magnitude of value corresponds to the degree of pleasure. Axiological pluralists, by contrast, hold that there are different sources of intrinsic value, such as happiness, knowledge, and beauty. \n\nThere are disagreements about the exact relation between value theory and ethics. Some philosophers characterize value theory as a subdiscipline of ethics while others see value theory as the broader term that encompasses other fields besides ethics, such as aesthetics and political philosophy . A different characterization sees the two disciplines as overlapping but distinct fields. The term axiological ethics is sometimes used for the discipline studying this overlap, that is, the part of ethics that studies values. The two disciplines are sometimes distinguished based on their focus: ethics is about moral behavior or what is right while value theory is about value or what is good . Some ethical theories, like consequentialism, stand very close to value theory by defining what is right in terms of what is good. But this is not true for ethics in general and deontological theories tend to reject the idea that what is good can be used to define what is right. [ m ]\n\nMoral psychology explores the psychological foundations and processes involved in moral behavior. It is an empirical science that studies how humans think and act in moral contexts. It is interested in how moral reasoning and judgments take place, how moral character forms, what sensitivity people have to moral evaluations, and how people attribute and react to moral responsibility . \n\nOne of its key topics is moral development or the question of how morality develops on a psychological level from infancy to adulthood. According to Lawrence Kohlberg , children go through different stages of moral development as they understand moral principles first as fixed rules governing reward and punishment, then as conventional social norms, and later as abstract principles of what is objectively right across societies. A closely related question is whether and how people can be taught to act morally . \n\nEvolutionary ethics , a closely related field, explores how evolutionary processes have shaped ethics . One of its key ideas is that natural selection is responsible for moral behavior and moral sensitivity. It interprets morality as an adaptation to evolutionary pressure that augments fitness by offering a selective advantage. Altruism , for example, can provide benefits to group survival by improving cooperation. Some theorists, like Mark Rowlands , argue that morality is not limited to humans, meaning that some non-human animals act based on moral emotions . Others explore evolutionary precursors to morality in non-human animals. \n\nDescriptive ethics, also called comparative ethics, studies existing moral codes, practices, and beliefs. It investigates and compares moral phenomena in different societies and different groups within a society. It aims to provide a value-neutral and empirical description without judging or justifying which practices are objectively right. For instance, the question of how nurses think about the ethical implications of abortion belongs to descriptive ethics. Another example is descriptive business ethics, which describes ethical standards in the context of business, including common practices, official policies, and employee opinions. Descriptive ethics also has a historical dimension by exploring how moral practices and beliefs have changed over time. \n\nDescriptive ethics is a multidisciplinary field that is covered by disciplines such as anthropology , sociology , psychology , and history . Its empirical outlook contrasts with the philosophical inquiry into normative questions, such as which ethical principles are correct and how to justify them. \n\nThe history of ethics studies how moral philosophy has developed and evolved in the course of history. It has its origin in ancient civilizations. In ancient Egypt , the concept of Maat was used as an ethical principle to guide behavior and maintain order by emphasizing the importance of truth, balance, and harmony. [ n ] In ancient India starting in the 2nd millennium BCE, the Vedas and later Upanishads were composed as the foundational texts of Hindu philosophy and discussed the role of duty and the consequences of one's actions . Buddhist ethics originated in ancient India between the 6th and 5th centuries BCE and advocated compassion , non-violence , and the pursuit of enlightenment . Ancient China in the 6th century BCE [ o ] saw the emergence of Confucianism , which focuses on moral conduct and self-cultivation by acting in agreement with virtues, and Daoism , which teaches that human behavior should be in harmony with the natural order of the universe . \n\nIn ancient Greece , Socrates ( c. 469–399 BCE ) emphasized the importance of inquiry into what a good life is by critically questioning established ideas and exploring concepts like virtue, justice, courage, and wisdom. According to Plato ( c. 428–347 BCE ), to lead a good life means that the different parts of the soul are in harmony with each other. For Aristotle (384–322 BCE), a good life is associated with being happy by cultivating virtues and flourishing. Starting in the 4th century BCE, the close relation between right action and happiness was also explored by the Hellenistic schools of Epicureanism , which recommended a simple lifestyle without indulging in sensory pleasures, and Stoicism , which advocated living in tune with reason and virtue while practicing self-mastery and becoming immune to disturbing emotions. \n\nEthical thought in the medieval period was strongly influenced by religious teachings. Christian philosophers interpreted moral principles as divine commands originating from God. Thomas Aquinas (1224–1274 CE) developed natural law ethics by claiming that ethical behavior consists in following the laws and order of nature, which he believed were created by God. In the Islamic world, philosophers like Al-Farabi ( c. 878–950 CE ) and Avicenna (980–1037 CE) synthesized ancient Greek philosophy with the ethical teachings of Islam while emphasizing the harmony between reason and faith. In medieval India, Hindu philosophers like Adi Shankara ( c. 700–750 CE ) and Ramanuja (1017–1137 CE) [ p ] saw the practice of spirituality to attain liberation as the highest goal of human behavior. \n\nMoral philosophy in the modern period was characterized by a shift toward a secular approach to ethics. Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) identified self-interest as the primary drive of humans. He concluded that it would lead to \"a war of every man against every man\" unless a social contract is established to avoid this outcome. David Hume (1711–1776) thought that only moral sentiments, like empathy , can motivate ethical actions while he saw reason not as a motivating factor but only as what anticipates the consequences of possible actions. Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), by contrast, saw reason as the source of morality. He formulated a deontological theory , according to which the ethical value of actions depends on their conformity with moral laws independent of their outcome. These laws take the form of categorical imperatives , which are universal requirements that apply to every situation. \n\nGeorg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831) saw Kant's categorical imperative on its own as an empty formalism and emphasized the role of social institutions in providing concrete content to moral duties. According to the Christian philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855), the demands of ethical duties are sometimes suspended when doing God's will. Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) formulated criticisms of both Christian and Kantian morality. Another influential development in this period was the formulation of utilitarianism by Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832) and John Stuart Mill (1806–1873). According to the utilitarian doctrine, actions should promote happiness while reducing suffering and the right action is the one that produces the greatest good for the greatest number of people. \n\nAn important development in 20th-century ethics in analytic philosophy was the emergence of metaethics. Significant early contributions to this field were made by G. E. Moore (1873–1958), who argued that moral values are essentially different from other properties found in the natural world. R. M. Hare (1919–2002) followed this idea in formulating his prescriptivism , which states that moral statements are commands that, unlike regular judgments , are neither true nor false. J. L. Mackie (1917–1981) suggested that every moral statement is false since there are no moral facts. An influential argument for moral realism was made by Derek Parfit (1942–2017), who argued that morality concerns objective features of reality that give people reasons to act in one way or another. Bernard Williams (1929–2003) agreed with the close relation between reasons and ethics but defended a subjective view instead that sees reasons as internal mental states that may or may not reflect external reality. \n\nAnother development in this period was the revival of ancient virtue ethics by philosophers like Philippa Foot (1920–2010). In the field of political philosophy, John Rawls (1921–2002) relied on Kantian ethics to analyze social justice as a form of fairness . In continental philosophy, phenomenologists such as Max Scheler (1874–1928) and Nicolai Hartmann (1882–1950) built ethical systems based on the claim that values have objective reality that can be investigated using the phenomenological method. Existentialists like Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) and Simone de Beauvoir (1908–1986), by contrast, held that values are created by humans and explored the consequences of this view in relation to individual freedom, responsibility, and authenticity. This period also saw the emergence of feminist ethics , which questions traditional ethical assumptions associated with a male perspective and puts alternative concepts, like care , at the center. ",
  "Vāhana ( Sanskrit : वाहन , romanized : vāhana , lit. 'that which carries') or vahanam ( Sanskrit : वाहनम् , romanized : vāhanam ) denotes the being, typically an animal or mythical entity, a particular Hindu deity is said to use as a vehicle. In this capacity, the vāhana is often called the deity's \"mount\". Upon the partnership between the deity and his vāhana is woven much iconography and Hindu theology . Deities are often depicted riding (or simply mounted upon) the vāhana. Other times, the vāhana is depicted at the deity's side or symbolically represented as a divine attribute. The vāhana may be considered an accoutrement of the deity: though the vāhana may act independently, they are still functionally emblematic or even syntagmatic of their \"rider\". The deity may be seen sitting or standing on the vāhana. They may be sitting on a small platform, or riding on a saddle or bareback. \n\nVah in Sanskrit means to carry or transport. The word also means ' vehicle ' in Sanskrit and other Indian languages \n\nIn Hindu iconography , positive aspects of the vehicle are often emblematic of the deity that it carries. Nandi the bull, vehicle of Shiva , represents strength and virility. Dinka the mouse, vehicle of Ganesha , represents speed and sharpness. Parvani the peacock, vehicle of Kartikeya , represents splendor and majesty. The hamsa , vehicle of Saraswati , represents wisdom, grace, and beauty.\n\nHowever, the vehicle animal also symbolizes the evil forces over which the deity dominates. Mounted on Parvani, Kartikeya reins in the peacock's vanity. Seated on Dinka the rat (Mushika), Ganesha crushes useless thoughts, which multiply like rats in the dark. Shani , protector of property, has a vulture, raven, or crow within whom he represses thieving tendencies. Under Shani's influence, the vahana can make even malevolent events bring hope.\n\nGaruda , and his story of becoming the mount of Vishnu , is richly detailed in Hindu texts. Born to Vinata and bearing the power of Kashyapa 's penance, the demigod is anguished to find that his mother is enslaved by the cruel Kadru . When he pleaded with Kadru to free his mother, the latter demanded the nectar of immortality as the price of her liberty. His legend of securing amrita , the nectar of immortality, is described in the episode known as Amṛtakalaśāpaharaṇam :\n\nGaruḍa approached the pot of nectar, and Viśvakarmā who attacked him first was felled to the ground. The dust storm raised by the waving of Garuḍa’s wings blinded everybody. The Devas and Indra, nay, even the sun and the Moon lined up against Garuḍa, but he defeated them all, and entered the particular place where the pot of nectar was kept. Two terrific wheels were rotating round the pot and they would cut into mince-meat anybody who tried to lay hands on the pot and a machine circled the wheels. Below the wheels were two monstrous serpents with glowing eyes and protruding tongues like flashes of fire, and the serpents never closed their eyes. The very look with those eyes was enough to poison anyone to death. Garuḍa blinded those eyes by raising a torrent of dust, pierced them in the middle with his beak and through the hole, his body reduced to such a tiny shape, went nearer to the pot. He destroyed the wheels and the machine, and carrying the pot of nectar in his beaks rose to the sky shielding the light of the sun by his outspread wings. Mahāviṣṇu, who became so much pleased with the tremendous achievements of Garuḍa asked him to choose any boon. Garuḍa requested Viṣṇu that he should be made his (Viṣṇu's) vehicle and rendered immortal without his tasting amṛta. Both the boons were granted.\n\nWhile the god Ganesha was still a child, a giant mouse began to terrorize all his friends. Ganesha trapped him with his lasso and made him his mount. Mushika was originally a gandharva , or celestial musician. After absent mindedly walking over the feet of a rishi (sage) named Vamadeva, Mushika was cursed and transformed into a mouse. However, after the rishi recovered his temper, he promised Mushika that one day, the gods themselves would bow down before him. The prophecy was fulfilled when the mouse became the vahana of Ganesha.\n\nBefore becoming the vehicle of Shiva, Nandi was a deity called Nandikeshvara , lord of joy and master of music and dance. Then, without warning, his name and his functions were transferred to the aspect of Shiva known as the deity Nataraja . From half-man, half-bull, he became simply a bull. Since that time, he has watched over each of Shiva's temples, always looking towards him.\n\nKartikeya , the war-god known as Murugan in Southern India , is mounted on a peacock named Paravani. This peacock was originally a demon called Surapadma , while the rooster was called the angel Krichi . After provoking Murugan in combat, the demon repented at the moment his lance descended upon him. He took the form of a tree and began to pray. The tree was cut in two. From one half, Murugan pulled a rooster , which he made his emblem, and from the other, a peacock, which he made his mount. In another version, Karthikeya was born to kill the demon, Tarakasura . He was raised by the Krittikas and led the divine armies when he was 6 days old. It is said that after defeating Tarakasura, the god forgave him and transformed him into his ride, the peacock.\n\nThe animal correspondences of Hindu vehicles are not consistent with Greek and Roman mythology , or other belief systems which may tie a particular animal to a particular deity. For example, the goddess Lakshmi of the Hindus has elephants, or an owl, or (a rare instance of a non-animal vehicle) the lotus blossom as her vehicle. The goddess Athena of ancient Greece also had an owl as her emblematic familiar, but the meanings invested in the owls by the two different belief systems are not the same, nor are the two goddesses themselves similar, despite their mutual identification with owls.\n\nLakshmi is, among other things, primarily the goddess of wealth, and her owl is a warning against distrust and isolationism, even selfishness. Athena, though also a goddess of prosperity, is primarily the goddess of wisdom, and her owl symbolizes secret knowledge and scholarship. Perhaps due to their shared geography, the Greco-Roman interpretation is paralleled in Roman Catholic iconography , in which St. Jerome , most famed for editing the New Testament , is often (though not always) depicted with an owl as a symbol of wisdom and scholarship. Depending on the tribe, Native American religious iconography attributes a wide range of attributes to the owl, both positive and negative, as do the Ainu and Russian cultures, but none parallel the Hindu attributes assigned to the owl as Lakshmi's divine vehicle. \n\nSome hold that similar analyses could be performed cross-culturally for any of the other Hindu divine vehicles, and in each case, any parallels with the values assigned to animal totems in other cultures are likely to be either coincidence, or inevitable (as in linking bulls to virility), rather than evidence of parallel development. In dialectic , this is countered by the retort that each totem or vahana, as an aspect of ishta-devata (or an ishta-devata or asura in its own right), has innumerable ineffable teachings, insights and spiritual wisdom ; comparative analysis yields benefit, though knowledge and understanding is not served by collapsing their qualities into homogenous signification .\n\nThese correspondences are not always consistent. Ganesha, for example, is sometimes shown with a peacock as his vehicle. Even more rarely, the elephant-headed Ganesh may be seen riding an elephant, or a lion, or a many-headed serpent (See Ganesha's Vahanas ). \n\nThe vahana , the mount or vehicle of a deity, serves the function of doubling a deity's powers. The vahana also represents the devotee's mind which allows the deity to guide the devotee. Durga the warrioress could not have destroyed the demon Mahishasura without the aid of her vehicle, lion, which was given by her father Himalaya, for the stated purpose. Lakshmi, goddess of fortune, dispenses both material and spiritual riches from her mount, Uluka the owl. Ganesha, remover of obstacles, cannot go everywhere despite his elephant-like strength. However, his vehicle, Mushika the mouse, who can crawl into the smallest crevice or Akhuketana the rat, who can survive just about anywhere, can assist Ganesha to overcome the greatest obstacles.",
  "Panhellenic Games is the collective term for four separate religious festivals held in ancient Greece that became especially well known for the athletic competitions they included. The four festivals were: the Olympic Games , which were held at Olympia in honor of Zeus ; the Pythian Games , which took place in Delphi and honored Apollo ; the Nemean Games , occurring at Nemea and also honoring Zeus; and, finally, the Isthmian Games set in Isthmia and held in honor of Poseidon . The places at which these games were held were considered to be \"the four great panhellenic sanctuaries.\" Each of these Games took place in turn every four years, starting with the Olympics. Along with the fame and notoriety of winning the ancient Games, the athletes earned different crowns of leaves from the different Games. From the Olympics, the victor won an olive wreath, from the Pythian Games a laurel wreath, from the Nemean Games a crown of wild celery leaves, and from the Isthmian Games a crown of pine. \n\nThe Olympiad , the four year cycle starting with the Olympic Games, was one of the ways the Ancient Greeks measured time. The Games took place over a four-year cycle that began with the Olympic Games in the first year. The Nemean Games were held in year two, the Pythian Games in year three, and the Isthmian Games in year four. They were structured this way so that individual athletes could participate in all of the Games. The dial on the Antikythera mechanism , a mysterious artefact from ancient Greece that appears to have had calendar functions among other uses, was organized to track the Olympiad and suggests that four Games occurred on different years. \n\nParticipants could come from all over the Greek world, including the various Greek colonies from Asia Minor to Iberia . Substantial wealth was required to pay for training, transportation, lodging, and other expenses. However, competitors often were funded by their hometowns or private patrons, and many of them traveled together from one competition to another, winning cash awards as they went. \n\nThe main events at each of the Games were chariot racing , wrestling , boxing , pankration , stadion and various other foot races, and the pentathlon (made up of wrestling, stadion , long jump , javelin throw , and discus throw ). Except for the chariot race, all the events were performed nude. Since the Olympic Games was the original and the pinnacle of all the games in the circuit, each festival might have had its own events but had to include all the events that took place at the Olympics, according to Young. This gave the athletes the opportunity to compete in the same core events at all the Games in the Panhellenic circuit.\n\nThe Games were hugely popular not only for their three-day sporting competitions but also because they brought many spectators from all over, according to classics historian Jason König. This allowed for people to partake in other activities like religious events, speeches, and even musical performances. \n\nThe Olympic Games were the oldest of the four, said to have begun in 776 BC. It is more likely though that they were founded sometime in the late 7th century BC. They lasted until the Roman Emperor Theodosius , a Christian, abolished them as heathen in AD 393. The Pythian, Nemean, and Isthmian Games most likely began sometime in the first or second quarter of the 6th century BC.\n\nThe Olympic Games are also known as the Stephanitic Games (derived from stephanos, the Attic Greek word for crown), because winners received only a garland for victory. No financial or material prizes were awarded, unlike at other ancient Greek athletic or artistic contests, such as the Panathenaic Games , at which winners were awarded many amphorae of first-class Athenian olive-oil. Though victors received no material awards at the Games, they were often showered with gifts and honours on returning to their polis . \n\nAccording to Pindar’s Olympian 1 , the origin of the Ancient Olympic Games can be traced to Pelops , son of Tantalus . Pelops seeks to win the hand of Hippodameia in marriage. King Oenomaus , Hippodameia’s father, knows of a prophecy that declares his death to be at the hands of his son in law. King Oenomaus decides the only way for him to marry his daughter is to take part in a chariot race that has killed many other suitors. Pelops asks a favor of Poseidon to bestow upon him a chariot fast enough to bring him victory. Poseidon granted him a golden chariot and winged horses. With this chariot, Pelops won the race and was able to marry Hippodameia. It is also claimed that Pelops had Myrtilus sabotage King Oenomaus’ chariot which caused him to lose the race and die during the process. After his victory, Pelops organized a festival to take place at Olympia with chariot races and other Games in tribute to the gods and to honor King Oenomaus. \n\nThe Olympic Games took place every four years at the site of Olympia in Greece. It is thought that first recorded Games were in 776 BC but it is possible that they could have been around for many years before this according to scholar David C. Young. The Olympics were the first established Games for approximately 200 years before the remaining Panhellenic Games came into creation. Since the Games take place in Olympia, the festival held and sacrifices/offerings are in honor of Zeus, the winner of the Games receives an olive wreath . This comes from the myth (as told by Pausanias) that Heracles started the Olympic Games and planted an olive tree that became sacred to the Greeks and from which the Olympic victors' wreaths were cut. \n\nIn Pindar's version of the Olympics, the chariot race was the first of the events at creation. In Pausanias' versions, the foot race is the only event until the fourteenth Olympic Festival. Then another race is added that is longer than the original race. Since the Olympic Games was the original and the pinnacle of all the games in the Circuit, each Festival may have its own events but it must include all the events that took place at the Olympics, according to Young. This gives the athletes the opportunity to compete in the event at all the Games in the Panhellenic circuit.\n\nAnother origin story from Pausanias was that Heracles challenged his younger brothers to a foot race. The winner of the race would receive an olive branch as a reward since they were in such high supply. Pausanias attributes another origin myth to Zeus . It is thought he started the Olympic Games in honor of his victory defeating his father, Cronus . \n\nThe Pythian Games were established in 582 BC in Delphi to honor the god Apollo . Originally, these games occurred every eight years and there was just one contest—the singing of a hymn to Apollo, accompanied on the cithara. The Pythian Games were the second most important of the Panhellenic Games and took place in late August of the third year of every Olympiad. However, there is some debate about the start of the Pythian Festival amongst historians. Some historians believe Pausanias who dates the first Pythian festival to 586 BC. This argument is because there are few references to the date in Pindar’s poems whereas Pausanias more clearly articulates numbered festivals. These Games include a mix of athletic events that took place at the previous Olympic Games, and musical events. The prize to the winner of the Pythian Games is a laurel wreath (also known as bay laurel, Laurus nobilis ).\n\nIn Pausanias' Description of Greece , he lists Cleisthenes of Sicyon as the winner of the first Pythian Games chariot race. Cleisthenes is also credited with the creation of the Pythian Games. He sought after a suitor for to wed his daughter, Agariste . He organized a competition for those who thought of themselves as worthy to compete in athletic competitions. These competitions evolved into the Pythian Festival.\n\nThe Nemean Games were established at the sanctuary of Zeus in Nemea in 573 BC. These Games are held every other year, every second and fourth year, in the same years that the Isthmian Games are held, though at different times during the years. The Nemean Games were held in July, whereas the Isthmian were held in April or May. \n\nThe Nemean Games have two origination stories. Pausanias tells of the most recognized myth that the Games were originally funeral Games to honor the death of baby Opheltes , the infant son of Lykourgos and Eurydike . Lykourgos was told of a prophecy that his son could not touch the ground until he walked. Lykourgos appointed a slave to take care of his son and prevent him from being set down. One day the Seven Against Thebes came across the slave and baby Opheltes and asked for a drink. The slave set the babe on the ground amongst wild celery to assist the Seven. Opheltes was attacked by a snake and killed, thus fulfilling the prophecy. The Nemean Games were held in his honor with the prize to the victor being a wreath of wild celery. \n\nThe second origination is that of Heracles first of ten labors by King Eurystheus . He was tasked with bringing back the skin of the lion that stalked the hills of Nemea. Heracles came to a village, Cleonae where he met Molorchus. Molorchus agreed to make a sacrifice to Heracles if he did not return after 30 days, and Zeus if he did. Heracles found the lion and followed him to his cave. He blocked on entrances then went in after the lion and attacked. Heracles returned to Molorchus' home on the 30th day and they made a sacrifice to Zeus. The Games are said to be in honor of both Zeus and Heracles each year.\n\nThe Isthmian Games started near Corinth in 582 B.C., the same year as the Pythian Games began in Delphi. They are held every second and fourth year, just like the Nemean Games, but in the spring (April or May). The winner of the Isthmian Games originally received a pine crown, but in the Classical era dry celery was substituted. \n\nPausanias attributes the origin of the Games to King Sisyphus of Corinth . Sisyphus held the Games at a funeral in honor of Melikertes (later changed to Palaimon ), a boy who drowned in the gulf. According to Pausanias, Palaimon was killed because Hera found out his parents were raising baby Dionysus which brought down her wrath. \n\nPlutarch and Apollodorus credit the origin of the Isthmian Games with Theseus . Theseus was travelling to Athens when he heard of Sinis. Sinis was a conqueror and a thief. He would kill his victims by tying them to the top of fir trees that he pulled down, then letting them spring back which caused the victim to launched into the air and fall back down to the ground. Theseus killed Sinis in the same manner. He then held the funerary Games in honor of the deceased. Plutarch also credits Theseus with holding the Games in honor of Poseidon, since they were typically held in his sanctuary in Corinth. \n\nAccording to archaeologist, H.W. Pleket, in the early days of the Olympic Games, before the formation of local or the remaining \"Big Four\" festivals, the athletes mostly came from the wealthy class of Greek male athletes. This is because the cost training and traveling would be too great for those of low birth to participate. Pleket and historian David Stone Potter describe a view from Alcibiades saying how he would rather breed horses for racing than take part in the gymnastic events because it was \"not to be pursued by one of low estate.\" However, as the games progressed, less wealthy athletes were able to eventually take part in the Festival by being sponsored by their home towns or wealthy backers. Many of the less wealthy had to work their way up through the local festivals in order to prove themselves.\n\nYoung describes how the men were divided into different class groups for the Games however, the division was different at different festivals. These groups consisted of boys, youths and men but sometimes may just be broken into men and boys. Edward Norman Gardiner makes the point that physical fitness and athletics is incredibly important in the Ancient Greek world because every male is required to take part in the Greek military. Because of the environment of warfare, physical fitness was essential to men's life. \n\nWhile the majority of those that participated in the Games is overwhelmingly free Greek men, there is evidence that there were female athletes as well that participated in the Panhellenic Games, often as chariot race horse owners. Historian, Georgia Tsouvala, gives three examples of inscriptions from lesser polis festivals that provide evidence of female athletes that were members of the gymnasia. Tsouvala also points out, while it's not common for women to have been able to partake in any form of physical education in ancient Greece, there are some states where it's encouraged like Sparta . In many ancient Greek works from Vergil , to Plutarch , to Ovid , there are reverences made to Spartan women taking part in traditionally male activities like boar hunting, pancration , and discus throwing to name a few. \n\nTsouvala points out that other than as chariot horse owners, it was likely that girls and women would take part in footraces in the festivals in honor of Artemis and Iphigeneia . There was also evidence discovered in Naples that held inscriptions detailing young women who participated in the stadion and dolichos foot races. \n\nThe male athletes that participated in the Panhellenic Games did so nude. This was common and not viewed as something shameful or indecent because Ancient Greeks did not have the same attitude toward nudity as is common in Western Judeo-Christian society, according to David Young. Young also points out the etymology of the word gymnasium which breaks down to its core word gymnos which means naked, so literally \"to train naked\". Young says that while men believed there was nothing indecent about the nude form, women were not allowed to be nude because it led to promiscuity. However, Plutarch's Life of Lycurgus describes how Spartan women were encouraged to participate naked in all their activities except for some festivals where singing and dancing with men was permitted. ",
  "Captain Cook is a 1972 book about Captain Cook by Alistair MacLean . It was a rare non fiction work from MacLean who wrote it out of his great admiration for Cook. \n\nIn 1976 Maclean's second wife Mary formed a company with producer Peter Snell, Aleelle Productions, who aimed to make movies based on MacLean novels including Golden Gate , Bear Island , The Way to Dusty Death and Captain Cook . No film resulted.\n\nThis article about a biographical or autobiographical book is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "A disk magazine , colloquially known as a diskmag or diskzine , is a magazine that is distributed in electronic form to be read using computers . These had some popularity in the 1980s and 1990s as periodicals distributed on floppy disk , hence their name. The rise of the Internet in the late 1990s caused them to be superseded almost entirely by online publications, which are sometimes still called \"diskmags\" despite the lack of physical disks. \n\nA unique and defining characteristic about a diskmag in contrast to a typical ASCII \"zine\" or \"t-file\" (or even \"g-file\") is that a diskmag usually comes housed as an executable program file that will only run on a specific hardware platform . A diskmag tends to have an aesthetically appealing and custom graphical user interface (or even interfaces), background music and other features that take advantage of the hardware platform the diskmag was coded for. Diskmags have been written for many platforms, ranging from the C64 on up to the IBM PC and have even been created for video game consoles , like scenedicate for the Sega Dreamcast .\n\nEarly home and hobby users of personal computers in the late 1970s and early 1980s sometimes typed in programs, usually in the BASIC language, which were published in the computer magazines of the time. This was a lot of work, and prone to error, so the idea of publishing a magazine directly on a computer-readable medium so that the programs could be run directly without typing came independently to several people.\n\nSome ideas of putting bar codes into paper magazines, which could be read into a computer with the appropriate peripheral, were floated at the time, but never caught on. Since the common data storage medium of the earliest home computers was the audio cassette, the first magazine published on a physical computer medium was actually a cassette magazine rather than a disk magazine; CLOAD magazine, for the Radio Shack TRS-80 computer, began publication in 1978, named after the command to load a program from cassette on that computer system.\n\nCLOAD was not the first electronic periodical, however, because various ARPANET digests had been published as text files sent around the network since the early 1970s. These, however, were pure ASCII text and hence were not diskmags by the current definition. Also, at the time, few people outside of academic institutions had access to this forerunner of the Internet .\n\nIn September, 1981, the first issue of Softdisk was published for Apple II computers; coming out monthly on a 5¼\" diskette, this was the first floppy-disk-based periodical. This was the first publication of a company also known as Softdisk which would later bring out similar publications for the Commodore 64 , IBM PC , and Apple Macintosh . Of these magazines, the one for the Commodore 64 , called Loadstar , continued publishing until issue 249 in 2007 - making it the longest running disk software magazine in history. Other publishers produced a variety of competing publications, including Diskazine , Window , I.B.Magazette , UPTIME , and PC Life . The Atari ST , in 1986, saw the first disk magazine in the shape of ST News . This was an English-language on-disk magazine from the Netherlands. Some publishers of paper magazines published disk companions, either polybagged with the magazines (in the form of so-called covermounts ) or available as separate subscriptions.\n\nIn the early 1990s, id Software founders John Carmack and John Romero had some of their earliest works published on disk magazines while working for Softdisk . A short-lived game subscription called Gamer's Edge published side-scrolling and 3D games written by the team that would later create Commander Keen and Doom .\n\nBy the mid-1990s, CD-ROMs were taking over from floppy disks as the major data storage and transfer medium. Some of the existing disk magazines switched to this format while others, such as Digital Culture Stream, were founded as CD-based magazines from the start. The higher capacity of this format, along with the faster speed of newer computers, allowed disk magazines to provide more of a multimedia experience, including music and animation. Such things as movie trailers and music samples could now be provided, allowing a disk magazine to target fans of the entertainment industry rather than the computer hobbyists of the earlier times.\n\nMany disk magazines of the 1990s and later are connected with the demoscene , including Grapevine , for the Amiga computer. Demoscene diskmags have been known to cross over into the closely neighboring underground computer art scene and warez scenes as well. Some of the more commonly well known English diskmags include: Hugi , Imphobia , Pain , Scenial , Daskmig ( IBM PC ), Jurassic Pack , RAW , Upstream , ROM , Seenpoint , Generation ( Amiga ), Undercover Magascene , Chaos Control Digizine , Maggie , DBA Diskmagazine , Alive and ST News ( Atari ST ).\n\nIn the late 1990s, the Internet became popular among the general public, which had the effect of killing the market for disk-based publications because people could now access the same sorts of material through the net. As a result, disk-based periodicals became uncommon, as publishers of electronic magazines preferred to use the Web or e-mail as their distribution medium.\n\nDemoscene magazines based on executable program files are still commonly called diskmags, although they are seldom distributed on physical disks any more. Bulletin board systems and the Internet took over as major distribution channels for these magazines already in the 1990s.\n\nThe occasional CD- or DVD-based multimedia magazine has come out since 2000, though more often as a promotional gimmick than a self-sustaining publication. More effort has lately gone into creating and promoting Web sites, ezines , blogs , and email lists than physical-medium-based publications. Some publications that are termed \"diskmags\" are today distributed through the internet ( FTP , World Wide Web , IRC , etc.). The former entertainment disk magazine Launch transformed into the online video site LAUNCHcast , owned by Yahoo! . Blender also began life as a CD-ROM diskmag with US-wide\ndistribution. It later transitioned to print. However, with the popularity of tablet computers and portable e-book readers, some print publications are transitioning to electronic form, and other all-electronic publications are starting up.\n\nThe longest-lasting disk magazine is, surprisingly enough, for the long-obsolete Commodore 64 computer; Loadstar , originally published by Softdisk starting in 1984, and later an independent company, has continued publishing well into the 2000s for a \"cult following\" of Commodore buffs.\n\nDisk magazines differed in the sorts of material they emphasised. Several distinct sorts of things could be published in an electronic periodical, and different ones might have all or most of their content in one or another of these categories:",
  "A menhir ( / ˈ m ɛ n h ɪər / ; from Brittonic languages : maen or men , \"stone\" and hir or hîr , \"long\" ), standing stone , orthostat , or lith is a large upright stone , emplaced in the ground by humans, typically dating from the European middle Bronze Age . They can be found individually as monoliths , or as part of a group of similar stones. Menhirs' size can vary considerably, but they often taper toward the top.\n\nMenhirs are found across Europe, Africa, and Asia, with a concentration in Western Europe , notably in Ireland , Great Britain , and Brittany . Theories concerning their purpose remain speculative, with hypotheses ranging from druidic rituals to territorial markers or elements of an ideological system. Some menhirs feature engravings , including anthropomorphic figures and symbols, and are often associated with ancient religious ceremonies and burial chambers .\n\nThe word menhir was adopted from French by 19th-century archaeologists. The introduction of the word into general archaeological usage has been attributed to the 18th-century French military officer Théophile Corret de la Tour d'Auvergne . It is a combination of two words of the Breton language: maen and hir . In modern Welsh , they are described as maen hir , or \"long stone\". In modern Breton, the word peulvan is used, with peul meaning \"stake\" or \"post\" and van which is a soft mutation of the word maen which means \"stone\". In Germany and Scandinavia the word Bauta is used (German: Bautastein ; Norwegian: bautastein ) and this occasionally makes its way into English with the term \"bauta stone\".\n\nAlmost nothing is known of the social organization or religious beliefs of the people who erected the menhirs. Their language is also unknown. It is known, however, that they buried their dead and had the skills to grow crops, farm and make pottery, stone tools and jewelry. Identifying the purpose or use of menhirs remains speculative. Until recently, standing stones were associated with the Beaker people , who inhabited Europe during the European late Neolithic and early Bronze Age —later third millennium BC, c. 2800 –1800 BC. However, recent research into the age of megaliths in Brittany strongly suggests a far older origin, perhaps back to six to seven thousand years ago. \n\nDuring the European Middle Ages, standing stones were believed to have been built by the giants who lived before the biblical flood . Many of the megaliths were destroyed or defaced by early Christians; it is estimated that some 50,000 megaliths once stood in Northern Europe, where almost 10,000 now remain. Menhirs have also been found in many other parts of the world.\n\nMany menhirs are engraved with megalithic art , some with anthropomorphic features. Other common carvings are identified as images of stone axes , ploughs, shepherds' crooks, and yokes; and are named after these motifs. However, these identifications are not secure except for those of the stone axe images, and the names used to describe them are largely a matter of convenience. Some menhirs were broken up and incorporated into later passage graves , where they had new megalithic art carved with little regard for the previous pictures. It is not known if this re-use was deliberate or if the passage grave builders just saw menhirs as a convenient source of stone. \n\nWhere menhirs appear in groups, often in a circular, oval, henge , or horseshoe formation, they are sometimes called megalithic monuments. These are sites of ancient religious ceremonies, sometimes containing burial chambers. The exact function of menhirs has provoked more debate than practically any other issue in European prehistory . Over the centuries, they have variously been thought to have been used by druids for human sacrifice, used as territorial markers, or elements of a complex ideological system, used as mnemonic systems for oral cultures, or functioning as early calendars. Until the nineteenth century, antiquarians did not have substantial knowledge of prehistory, and their only reference points were provided by classical literature. The developments of radiocarbon dating and dendrochronology have significantly advanced scientific knowledge in this area.\n\nMenhirs are widely distributed across Europe, Africa, and Asia, but are most numerous in Western Europe; particularly in Ireland, Great Britain, and Brittany , where there are about 50,000 examples, and northwestern France, where there are some 1,200 further examples. Standing stones are usually difficult to date. They were constructed during many different periods across prehistory as part of the larger megalithic cultures in Europe and near areas. Some menhirs stand next to buildings that have an early or current religious significance. One example is the South Zeal Menhir in Devon, which formed the basis for a 12th-century monastery built by lay monks. The monastery later became the Oxenham Arms hotel, at South Zeal, and the standing stone remains in place in the snug bar at the hotel. \n\nIt is believed that practitioners of megalithic religions travelled via the sea, as the mass majority of menhirs are located on coasts, islands, and peninsulas. \n\nThe French comic book series Asterix features the character Obelix , who is known for carrying menhirs, as a sculptor and deliveryman. ",
  "The Zephyr Competition Team (or Z-Boys ) were a group of American skateboarders in the mid-1970s from Santa Monica and Venice, California . Originally consisting of 12 members, the Z-boys were originally sponsored by the Jeff Ho Surfboards and Zephyr Productions surf and skate shop. Their innovative surfing-based style and aerial moves formed the foundations of contemporary vert and transition skateboarding. The story of the Z-Boys and the Zephyr shop have been popularized in feature films such as Lords of Dogtown and Dogtown and Z-Boys . \n\nThe Z-boys began as a surf team for the Zephyr surfboard shop at Santa Monica. Jeff Ho , Skip Engblom , and Craig Stecyk opened the shop, titled Jeff Ho Surfboards and Zephyr Production Team, in 1973, and they soon began recruiting young locals to represent them in surfing competitions. 14-year-old Nathan Pratt was the first member of the team; he originally had worked in the shop as an apprentice surfboard shaper under Ho, Engblom, and Stecyk. In an interview with Juice Magazine , Pratt notes the following:\n\n\"Within our world, the surf team was primary and the skate team was secondary. Allen Sarlo , Tony Alva , Jay Adams , Stacy Peralta , Chris Cahill and myself were on the surf team before there was a skate team. We were junior members of the surf team along with John Baum, Jimmy and Ricky Tavarez and Brian Walker. Guys like Ronnie Jay, Wayne Inouye, Wayne Saunders, Pat Kaiser, Barry Amos, Jeff Sibley, Bill Urbany and Adrian Reif were the top dogs. The history, skill and accomplishments of all the team members was represented in those shirts. Then we added Bob Biniak, Wentzle Ruml, Paul Constantineau, Jim Muir, Shogo Kubo and Peggy Oki to the skate team so that a team shirt represented a decent number of people.\" \n\nIn 1974, Allen Sarlo , Jay Adams , Tony Alva , Chris Cahill, and Stacey Peralta joined the Zephyr team; these local youths exhibited street style and aggressive mannerisms both on and off the surfboard. The majority of the team lived in the \"Dogtown\" area of Santa Monica; their primary surfing spot was the Cove at Pacific Ocean Park . However, thanks to the invention of urethane wheels, the Z-boys began to transition their surfing style to skateboarding. \n\nIn 1975, Cahill, Pratt, Adams, Sarlo, Peralta, and Alva became the first members of the official Zephyr skateboarding team. Soon after, the Zephyr shop gained the final members of their team, making the total number 12 in all. These additional members were Bob Biniak, Paul Constantineau, Jim Muir, Peggy Oki , Shogo Kubo and Wentzle Ruml. The team began to practice in the backs of four schools in the surrounding area. Taking inspiration from surfer Larry Bertleman, the Z-boys would skate low to the ground, dragging their hands against the concrete as if they were riding a wave . \n\nThe Z-Boys' first appearance at a skateboard competition occurred at the 1975 Del Mar Nationals; the contest was the first major skateboarding competition since the mid 1960s. Their low, aggressive style in the freestyle section of the competition, though innovative, was critiqued by the older establishment of skateboarding. However, half of the finalists at the end of the competition were members of the Zephyr Competition Team: in the Freestyle category, Jay Adams was placed 3rd, Tony Alva 4th; for Slalom, Dennis Harney was 2nd, Nathan Pratt was 4th; finally, for Women’s Freestyle, Peggy Oki was 1st. The performance of the Z-Boys, especially Jay Adams' marked the beginning of a national change in the style of skateboarding. \n\nFrom 1976 to 1977, Southern California experienced a major drought that contributed to the 1st and 4th driest years in Californian history. In an effort to conserve water, neighborhood homes were draining their backyard swimming pools , leaving empty bowls of smooth concrete. The Z-boys took advantage of the sloping walls of the pools to push the boundary of innovation when it came to aerial skateboarding . Craig Stecyk's photographs of the Z-Boys' aerial maneuvers appeared in Skateboarder , under a series titled \"Dogtown Articles\"; Stecyk's collections aided in the spike of skateboarding popularity in the late 20th century. \n\nFollowing the success of the \"Dogtown Articles\", the Z-Boys witnessed an exponential rise in public popularity. Due to growing interest from rival companies, many Z-Boys left in favor of more lucrative sponsorships. By the end of 1976, the Zephyr Competition Team had ceased to exist. While the existence of the Zephyr team was short-lived, the Z-Boys are still widely regarded as the most influential team in skateboarding history. \n\nIn 2009, Tony Alva was inducted into the Skateboarding Hall of Fame . \n\nStacy Peralta was inducted into the same in 2010. \n\nIn 2012, Peggy Oki and Jay Adams were inducted. \n\n2014 saw Jim Muir getting inducted into the Skateboarding Hall of Fame. \n\nIn 2017, Shogo Kubo was inducted. \n\nIn 2019, Cris Dawson was inducted into the same. \n\nIn 2020, was the year that Bob Biniak got inducted into the Skateboarding Hall of Fame. \n\nIn 2023, Wentzle Ruml and Paul Constantineau were inducted. ",
  "Smoking bans , or smoke-free laws , are public policies, including criminal laws and occupational safety and health regulations, that prohibit tobacco smoking in certain spaces. The spaces most commonly affected by smoking bans are indoor workplaces and buildings open to the public such as restaurants , bars , office buildings , schools , retail stores, hospitals , libraries, transport facilities, and government buildings, in addition to public transport vehicles such as aircraft, buses, watercraft, and trains. However, laws may also prohibit smoking in outdoor areas such as parks, beaches, pedestrian plazas, college and hospital campuses, and within a certain distance from the entrance to a building, and in some cases, private vehicles and multi-unit residences.\n\nThe most common rationale cited for restrictions on smoking is the negative health effects associated with secondhand smoke (SHS), or the inhalation of tobacco smoke by persons who are not smoking. These include diseases such as heart disease , cancer , and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease . The number of smoking bans around the world increased substantially in the late 20th century and early 21st century due to increased knowledge about these health risks. Many early smoking restrictions merely required the designation of non-smoking areas in buildings, but policies of this type became less common following evidence that they did not eliminate the health concerns associated with SHS.\n\nOpinions on smoking bans vary. Many individuals and organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) support smoking bans on the basis that they improve health outcomes by reducing exposure to SHS and possibly decreasing the number of people who smoke, while others oppose smoking bans and assert that they violate individual and property rights and cause economic hardship, among other issues.\n\nSmoking bans are usually enacted in an attempt to protect non-smokers from the effects of secondhand smoke , which include an increased risk of heart disease , cancer , chronic obstructive pulmonary disease , and other diseases. Laws implementing bans on indoor smoking have been introduced by many countries and other jurisdictions as public knowledge about these health risks increased. \n\nAdditional rationales for smoking restrictions include reduced risk of fire in areas with explosive hazards; cleanliness in places where food, pharmaceuticals, semiconductors, or precision instruments and machinery are produced; decreased legal liability; potentially reduced energy use via decreased ventilation needs; reduced quantities of litter; healthier environments; and giving smokers incentive to quit. \n\nResearch has generated evidence that secondhand smoke causes the same problems as direct smoking, including lung cancer , cardiovascular disease , and lung ailments such as emphysema , bronchitis , and asthma . Specifically, meta-analyses show that lifelong non-smokers with partners who smoke in the home have a 20–30% greater risk of lung cancer than non-smokers who live with non-smokers. Non-smokers exposed to cigarette smoke in the workplace have an increased lung cancer risk of 16–19%. An epidemiology report by the Institute of Medicine (IOM), convened by the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), says that the risk of coronary heart disease is increased by around 25–30% when one is exposed to secondhand smoke. The data shows that even at low levels of exposure, there is risk and the risk increases with more exposure. \n\nA study issued in 2002 by the International Agency for Research on Cancer of the World Health Organization concluded that non-smokers are exposed to the same carcinogens on account of tobacco smoke as active smokers. Sidestream smoke emitted from the burning ends of tobacco products contains 69 known carcinogens, particularly benzopyrene and other polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons, and radioactive decay products, such as polonium-210 . Several well-established carcinogens have been shown by the tobacco companies' own research to be present at higher concentrations in secondhand smoke than in mainstream smoke. \n\nScientific organisations confirming the effects of secondhand smoke include the U.S. National Cancer Institute , the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the U.S. National Institutes of Health , the Surgeon General of the United States , and the World Health Organization. \n\nRestrictions upon smoking in bars and restaurants can substantially improve the air quality in such establishments. For example, one study listed on the website of the CDC states that New York's statewide law to eliminate smoking in enclosed workplaces and public places substantially reduced RSP (respirable suspended particles) levels in western New York hospitality venues. RSP levels were reduced in every venue that permitted smoking before the law was implemented, including venues in which only smoke from an adjacent room was observed at baseline. The CDC concluded that their results were similar to other studies which also showed substantially improved indoor air quality after smoking bans were instituted. \n\nA 2004 study showed New Jersey bars and restaurants had more than nine times the levels of indoor air pollution of neighbouring New York City, which had already enacted its smoking ban. \n\nResearch has also shown that improved air quality translates to decreased toxin exposure among employees. For example, among employees of the Norwegian establishments that enacted smoking restrictions, tests showed decreased levels of nicotine in the urine of both smoking and non-smoking workers (as compared with measurements prior to going smoke-free). \n\nIn 2009, the Public Health Law Research Program, a national program office of the US-based Robert Wood Johnson Foundation , published an evidence brief summarising the research assessing the effect of a specific law or policy on public health. They stated that \"There is strong evidence supporting smoking bans and restrictions as effective public health interventions aimed at decreasing exposure to secondhand smoke.\" \n\nOne of the world's earliest smoking bans was a 1575 Roman Catholic Church regulation which forbade the use of tobacco in any church in Mexico. In 1590, Pope Urban VII moved against smoking in church buildings. He threatened to excommunicate anyone who \"took tobacco in the porchway of or inside a church, whether it be by chewing it, smoking it with a pipe or sniffing it in powdered form through the nose\". Pope Urban VIII imposed similar restrictions in 1624. In 1604 King James VI and I published an anti-smoking treatise, A Counterblaste to Tobacco , that had the effect of raising taxes on tobacco. Russia banned tobacco for 70 years from 1627. The Ottoman Sultan Murad IV prohibited smoking in his empire in 1633 and had smokers executed . The earliest citywide European smoking bans were enacted shortly thereafter. Such bans were enacted in Bavaria , Kursachsen , and certain parts of Austria in the late 17th century. Smoking was banned in Berlin in 1723, in Königsberg in 1742, and in Stettin in 1744. These bans were repealed in the revolutions of 1848 . Prior to 1865 Russia had a ban on smoking in the streets. \n\nThe first building in the world to ban smoking was the Old Government Building in Wellington , New Zealand in 1876. The ban related to concerns about the threat of fire, as it is the second largest wooden building in the world. \n\nThe first modern attempt at restricting smoking saw Nazi Germany banning smoking in every university, post office, military hospital, and Nazi Party office, under the auspices of Karl Astel's Institute for Tobacco Hazards Research, established in 1941 under orders from Adolf Hitler . The Nazis conducted major anti-tobacco campaigns until the demise of their regime in 1945. \n\nIn the latter part of the 20th century, as research on the risks of secondhand tobacco smoke became public, the tobacco industry launched \"courtesy awareness\" campaigns. Fearing reduced sales, the industry began a media and legislative programme that focused upon \"accommodation\". Tolerance and courtesy were encouraged as a way to ease heightened tensions between smokers and those around them, while avoiding smoking bans. In the US, states were encouraged to pass laws providing separate smoking sections. \n\nIn 1975 the U.S. state of Minnesota enacted the Minnesota Clean Indoor Air Act , making it the first state to restrict smoking in most public spaces. At first restaurants were required to have \"No Smoking\" sections, and bars were exempt from the Act. As of 1 October 2007 Minnesota enacted a ban on smoking in all restaurants and bars statewide, called the Freedom to Breathe Act of 2007. \n\nThe resort town of Aspen, Colorado , became the first city in the US to restrict smoking in restaurants, in 1985, though it allowed smoking in areas that were separately ventilated. \n\nOn 3 April 1987 the city of Beverly Hills, California , initiated an ordinance to restrict smoking in most restaurants, in retail stores and at public meetings. It exempted restaurants in hotels – City Council members reasoned that hotel restaurants catered to large numbers of visitors from abroad, where smoking is more acceptable than in the United States. \n\nIn 1990 the city of San Luis Obispo, California , became the first city in the world to restrict indoor smoking in bars as well as in restaurants. The ban did not include workplaces, but covered all other indoor public spaces and its enforcement was somewhat limited. \n\nIn the United States, California's 1998 smoking ban encouraged other states such as New York to implement similar regulations. California's ban included a controversial restriction upon smoking in bars, extending the statewide ban enacted in 1994. As of April 2009, there were 37 states with some form of smoking ban. Some areas in California began banning smoking across whole cities, including every place except residential homes. More than 20 cities in California enacted park- and beach-smoking restrictions. [ citation needed ] In May 2011, New York City expanded its previously implemented smoking ban by banning smoking in parks, beaches and boardwalks, public golf courses and other areas controlled by the New York City Parks Department . In recent years New York City has passed administrative codes §17-502 and §17-508 forcing landlords of privately owned buildings, cooperatives, and condominiums to adopt a smoking policy into all leases. These codes oblige landlords to enact provisions telling tenants the exact locations where they can or can not smoke. In January 2010, the mayor of Boston, Massachusetts , Thomas Menino , proposed a restriction upon smoking inside public housing apartments under the jurisdiction of the Boston Housing Authority . \n\nFrom December 1993, in Peru , it became illegal to smoke in any public enclosed place and any public transport vehicle (according to Law 25357 issued on 27 November 1991 and its regulations issued on 25 November 1993 by decree D.S.983-93-PCM). There is also legislation restricting publicity, and it is also illegal (Law 26957 21 May 1998) to sell tobacco to minors or directly to advertise tobacco within 500m of schools (Law 26849 9 Jul 1997). [ citation needed ]\n\nOn 11 November 1975 Italy banned smoking on public transit vehicles (except for smokers' rail carriages) and in some public buildings (hospitals, cinemas, theatres, museums, universities and libraries). After an unsuccessful attempt in 1986, on 16 January 2003 the Italian parliament passed the Legge Sirchia , which would ban smoking in all indoor public places, including bars, restaurants, discotheques and offices from 10 January 2005. \n\nOn 3 December 2003, New Zealand passed legislation to progressively implement a smoking ban in schools, school grounds, and workplaces by December 2004. \n\nOn 29 March 2004, the Republic of Ireland implemented a nationwide ban on smoking in all workplaces. In Norway, similar legislation came into force on 1 June the same year. \n\nIn Scotland , Andy Kerr , the Minister for Health and Community Care, introduced a ban on smoking in public areas on 26 March 2006. Smoking was banned in all public places in the whole of the United Kingdom in 2007, when England became the final region to have the legislation come into effect (the age limit for buying tobacco also increased from 16 to 18 on 1 October 2007). \n\nOn 12 July 1999 a Division Bench of the Kerala High Court in India banned smoking in public places by declaring \"public smoking as illegal first time in the history of whole world, unconstitutional and violative of Article 21 of the Constitution\". The Bench, headed by Dr. Justice K. Narayana Kurup, held that \"tobacco smoking\" in public places (in the form of cigarettes, cigars, beedies or otherwise) \"falls within the mischief of the penal provisions relating to public nuisance as contained in the Indian Penal Code and also the definition of air pollution as contained in the statutes dealing with the protection and preservation of the environment, in particular, the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution), Act 1981.\" [ citation needed ]\n\nIn 2003 India introduced a law that banned smoking in public places like restaurants, public transport or schools. The same law also made it illegal to advertise cigarettes or other tobacco products. \n\nIn 2010 Nepal planned to enact a new anti-smoking bill that would ban smoking in public places and outlaw all tobacco advertising to prevent young people from smoking. \n\nOn 31 May 2011 Venezuela introduced a ban on smoking in all enclosed public and commercial spaces, including malls, restaurants, bars, discos, workplaces, etc. \n\nSmoking was first restricted in schools, hospitals, trains, buses and train stations in Turkey in 1996. In 2008 a more comprehensive smoking ban was implemented, covering all public indoor venues. \n\nThe Plage Lumière beach in La Ciotat , France , became the first beach in Europe to restrict smoking from August 2011, in an effort to encourage more tourists to visit the beach.\n\nIn 2012, smoking in Costa Rica became subject to some of the most restrictive regulations in the world, with the practice being banned from many outdoor recreational and educational areas as well as in public buildings and vehicles. \n\nAccording to a 2018 Gallup poll, 25% of U.S. adults believe that smoking should be completely banned in the country, marking the highest level of support recorded by Gallup so far. Previously, the percentage of adults supporting this measure had fluctuated between 11% and 24% over nearly thirty years of Gallup's tracking. \n\nAnother poll conducted by Kantor, of over 28,000 Europeans in 2020, found that seven in ten people support banning the use of e-cigarettes or heated tobacco products in areas where smoking is prohibited, reflecting an increase of seven percentage points since 2017. Relative majorities also favor the other two control policies surveyed: banning flavors in e-cigarettes, with 47% support (up by 7 points since 2017), and introducing plain packaging for cigarettes, also supported by 47% (up by 1 point). [ citation needed ]\n\nA February 2021 study (based on fieldwork done from August to September of 2020) reported that in all countries except Croatia, less than half of the respondents reported seeing people smoking inside the last time they visited a drinking establishment, such as a bar. Croatia stands out with 73% of respondents indicating this. In other countries, the proportions range from 47% in Cyprus, 45% in Slovakia, and 31% in Denmark, to only 3% in Sweden, 5% in Hungary, and 7% in Austria. These results indicate that despite the presence of indoor smoking bans across the EU, indoor tobacco smoke in drinking establishments remains an issue in several countries. \n\nSeveral studies have documented health and economic benefits related to smoking bans. A 2009 report by the Institute of Medicine concluded that smoking bans reduced the risk of coronary heart disease and heart attacks, but the report's authors were unable to identify the magnitude of this reduction. Also in 2009, a systematic review and meta-analysis found that bans on smoking in public places were associated with a significant reduction of incidence of heart attacks. The lead author of this meta-analysis, David Meyers, said that this review suggested that a nationwide ban on smoking in public places could prevent between 100,000 and 225,000 heart attacks in the United States each year. \n\nA 2012 meta-analysis found that smoke-free legislation was associated with a lower rate of hospitalizations for cardiac, cerebrovascular , and respiratory diseases , and that \"More comprehensive laws were associated with larger changes in risk.\" The senior author of this meta-analysis, Stanton Glantz , told USA Today that, with respect to exemptions for certain facilities from smoking bans, \"The politicians who put those exemptions in are condemning people to be put into the emergency room.\" A 2013 review found that smoking bans were associated with \"significant reduction in acute MI [ myocardial infarction ] risk\", but noted that \"studies with smaller population in the United States usually reported larger reductions, while larger studies reported relatively modest reductions\". \n\nA 2014 systematic review and meta-analysis found that smoke-free legislation was associated with approximately 10% reductions in preterm births and hospital attendance for asthma , but not with a decrease in low birth weight . A 2016 Cochrane review found that since the previous version of that review was published in 2010, the evidence that smoking bans improved health outcomes had become more robust, especially with respect to acute coronary syndrome admissions. \n\nHowever, other studies came to the conclusion that smoking bans have little or no short-term effect on myocardial infarction rates and other diseases. A 2010 study from the US used huge nationally representative databases to compare smoking-restricted areas with control areas and found no associations between smoking bans and short-term declines in heart attack rates. The authors have also analyzed smaller studies using subsamples and revealed that large short-term increases in myocardial infarction incidence following a smoking ban are as common as the large decreases. \n\nSmoking bans are generally acknowledged to reduce rates of smoking; smoke-free workplaces reduce smoking rates among workers, and restrictions upon smoking in public places reduce general smoking rates through a combination of stigmatisation and reduction in the social cues for smoking. The World Health Organization considers smoking bans to have an influence on reducing demand for tobacco by producing an environment where smoking becomes increasingly more difficult and to help shift social norms away from the acceptance of smoking in everyday life. Along with tax measures, cessation measures, and education, smoking bans are viewed by public health experts as an important element in reducing smoking rates and promoting positive health outcomes. When effectively implemented, they are seen as an important element of policy to support behaviour change in favour of a healthy lifestyle. However, reports in the popular press after smoking bans have been enacted often present conflicting accounts as regards perceptions of effectiveness. [ citation needed ]\n\nOne report stated that cigarette sales in Ireland and Scotland increased after their smoking bans were implemented. In contrast, another report states that in Ireland, cigarette sales fell by 16% in the six months after implementation of the ban. In the UK, cigarette sales fell by 11% during July 2007, the first month of the nationwide smoking ban, compared with July 2006. \n\nA 1992 document from Phillip Morris summarised the tobacco industry's concern about the effects of smoking bans: \"Total prohibition of smoking in the workplace strongly effects [ sic ] tobacco industry volume. Smokers facing these restrictions consume 11%–15% less than average and quit at a rate that is 84% higher than average.\" \n\nIn the United States, the CDC reported a levelling-off of smoking rates in recent years despite a large number of ever more comprehensive smoking bans and large tax increases. It has also been suggested that a \"backstop\" of hardcore smokers has been reached: those unmotivated and increasingly defiant in the face of further legislation. The smoking ban in New York City was credited with the reduction in adult smoking rates at nearly twice the rate as in the rest of the country, \"and life expectancy has climbed three years in a decade\". \n\nIn Sweden , use of snus , as an alternative to smoking, has risen steadily since that nation's smoking ban. \n\nSmoking restrictions may make it easier for smokers to quit. A survey suggests 22% of UK smokers may have considered quitting in response to that nation's smoking ban. \n\nRestaurant smoking restrictions may help to stop young people from becoming habitual smokers. A study of Massachusetts youths, found that those in towns with smoking bans were 35 percent less likely to be habitual smokers. \n\nMany studies have been published in the health industry literature on the economic effect of smoking bans. The majority of these government and academic studies have found that there is no negative economic impact associated with smoking restrictions and many have found that there may be a positive effect on local businesses. A 2003 review of 97 such studies of the economic effects of a smoking ban on the hospitality industry found that the \"best-designed\" studies concluded that smoking bans did not harm businesses. Similarly, a 2014 meta-analysis found no significant gains or losses in revenue in restaurants and bars affected by smoking bans. In addition, such laws may reduce health care costs, improve work productivity, and lower the overall cost of labour in the community thus protected, making that workforce more attractive for employers. [ citation needed ]\n\nStudies funded by the bar and restaurant associations have sometimes claimed that smoking bans have a negative effect on restaurant and bar profits. Such associations have also criticised studies which found that such legislation had no impact. Many bar and restaurant associations have relationships with the tobacco industry and are sponsored by them. \n\nA government survey in Sydney found that the proportion of the population attending pubs and clubs rose after smoking was banned inside them. However, a ClubsNSW report in August 2008 blamed the smoking ban for New South Wales clubs suffering their worst fall in income ever, amounting to a decline of $385 million. Income for clubs was down 11% in New South Wales. Sydney CBD club income fell 21.7% and western Sydney clubs lost 15.5%. \n\nSome smoking restrictions were introduced in German hotels, restaurants, and bars in 2008 and early 2009. The restaurant industry has claimed that some businesses in the states which restricted smoking in late 2007 ( Lower Saxony , Baden-Württemberg , and Hessen ) experienced reduced profits. The German Hotel and Restaurant Association (DEHOGA) claimed that the smoking ban deterred people from going out for a drink or meal, stating that 15% of establishments that adopted a ban in 2007 saw turnover fall by around 50%. However, a study by the University of Hamburg (Ahlfeldt and Maennig 2010) finds negative impacts on revenues, if any, only in the very short run. In the medium and long run, a recovery of revenues took place. These results suggest either, that the consumption in bars and restaurants is not affected by smoking bans in the long run, or, that negative revenue impacts by smokers are compensated by increasing revenues through non-smokers. \n\nThe Republic of Ireland was the first country to introduce fully smoke-free workplaces (29 March 2004, after it was delayed from 1 January 2004). The Irish workplace smoke-free law was introduced with the intention of protecting workers from secondhand smoke and to discourage smoking in a nation with a high percentage of smokers. In Ireland, the main opposition to the ban came from publicans. Many pubs introduced \"outdoor\" arrangements (generally heated areas with shelters). It was speculated by opponents that the smoke-free workplaces law would increase the amount of drinking and smoking in the home, but recent studies showed this was not the case. \n\nIreland's Office of Tobacco Control website indicates that \"an evaluation of the official hospitality sector data shows there has been no adverse economic effect from the introduction of this measure (the March 2004 national smoking ban in bars, restaurants, etc), despite claims that the smoke-free law was a significant contributing factor to the closure of hundreds of small rural pubs, with almost 440 fewer licences renewed in 2006 than in 2005.\" \n\nSmoking bans were enacted in Scotland on 26 March 2006, in Wales on 2 April 2007, in Northern Ireland on 30 April 2007, and in England on 1 July 2007. The legislation was cited as an example of good regulation which has had a favourable impact on the UK economy by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills , and a review of the impact of smoke-free legislation carried out for the Department of Health concluded that there was no clear adverse impact on the hospitality industry despite initial criticism from some voices within the pub trade.\n\nSix months after implementation in Wales, the Licensed Victuallers Association (LVA), which represents pub operators across Wales, claimed that pubs had lost up to 20% of their trade. The LVA said some businesses were on the brink of closure, others had already closed down, and there was little optimism trade would eventually return to previous levels. \n\nThe British Beer and Pub Association (BBPA), which represents some pubs and breweries across the UK claimed that beer sales were at their lowest level since the 1930s, ascribing a fall in sales of 7% during 2007 to the smoke-free regulations. \n\nAccording to a survey conducted by pub and bar trade magazine The Publican , the anticipated increase in sales of food following introduction of smoke-free workplaces did not immediately occur. The trade magazine's survey of 303 pubs in the United Kingdom found the average customer spent £14.86 on food and drink at dinner in 2007, virtually identical to 2006. \n\nA survey conducted by BII (formerly British Institute of Innkeeping) and the Federation of Licensed Victuallers' Associations (FLVA) concluded that sales had decreased by 7.3% in the 5 months since the introduction of smoke-free workplaces on 1 July 2007. Of the 2,708 responses to the survey, 58% of licensees said they had seen smokers visiting less regularly, while 73% had seen their smoking customers spending less time at the pub. \n\nIn the US, smokers and hospitality businesses initially argued that businesses would suffer from no-smoking laws. However, a 2006 review by the U.S. Surgeon General found that smoking restrictions were unlikely to harm businesses in practice, and that many restaurants and bars might see increased business. \n\nIn 2003, New York City amended its smoke-free law to include virtually all restaurants and bars, including those in private clubs, making it, along with the California smoke-free law, one of the toughest in the United States. The city's Department of Health found in a 2004 study that air pollution levels had decreased sixfold in bars and restaurants after the restrictions went into effect, and that New Yorkers had reported less secondhand smoke in the workplace. The study also found the city's restaurants and bars prospered despite the smoke-free law, with increases in jobs, liquor licenses, and business tax payments. The president of the New York Nightlife Association remarked that the study was not wholly representative, as by not differentiating between restaurants and nightclubs, the reform may have caused businesses like nightclubs and bars to suffer instead. A 2006 study by the New York State Department of Health found that \"the CIAA has not had any significant negative financial effect on restaurants and bars in either the short or the long term\". \n\nOn December 19, 1990, Carl's Jr. became the first large fast-food chain to ban smoking in all of its company-owned restaurants. On April 1, 1993, Showbiz Pizza Time Inc. , owner of Chuck E. Cheese , banned smoking in its restaurants. On January 26, 1994, Arby's Inc. announced it would ban smoking indoors in its 257 company-owned locations later that year. Dairy Queen Inc. , having banned indoor smoking in company-owned locations in 1993, announced that it would urge 6,000 Dairy Queen, Orange Julius , and Karmel Korn franchise owners to put a ban on smoking inside their restaurants. On February 24, 1994, fast-food restaurant McDonald's announced that it would ban smoking inside its 1,400 company-owned restaurants effective immediately and would \"continue to actively encourage our franchises to make their restaurants smoke-free, and more are voluntarily doing so every day.\" Taco Bell announced a similar ban on its company-owned restaurants on March 15, 1994. On December 21, 2000, Wendy's International Inc. announced an agreement to ban smoking in its company-owned restaurants by March 31, 2001, with implemented effective dates of \"Jan. 1 in the West, Feb. 1 in the Southeast, March 1 in upper northern states, and March 31 in the Midwest and Northeast.\" On August 11, 2005, Yum! Brands , parent company of KFC and Pizza Hut restaurants, announced that it would ban smoking inside some 1,200 KFCs and 1,675 Pizza Huts that were company-owned beginning the following week and encourage the ban to its franchise operators. \n\nIn Wauwatosa, Wisconsin , three restaurants received short-term exemptions from a local smoke-free ordinance in restaurants when they managed to demonstrate financial suffering because of it. \n\nA bar received the first hardship exemption in Washington, D.C. Maryland also has provisions for hardship exemptions. \n\nBellows-driven instruments – such as the accordion , concertina , melodeon and (Irish) Uilleann bagpipes – reportedly need less frequent cleaning and maintenance as a result of the Irish smoke-free law. \" Third-hand smoke \", solid particulates from secondhand smoke that are adsorbed onto surfaces and later re-emitted as gases or transferred through touch, are a particular problem for musicians. After playing in smoky bars, instruments can emit nicotine , 3-ethenylpyridine (3-EP), phenol , cresols , naphthalene , formaldehyde , and tobacco-specific nitrosamines (including some not found in freshly-emitted tobacco smoke), which can enter musicians' bodies through the skin, or be re-emitted as gases after they have left the smoky environment. Concern about third-hand smoke on instruments is one of the reasons many musicians, represented by the New Orleans Musicians' Clinic , supported the smoking ban there. \n\nPrisons are increasingly restricting tobacco smoking. In the United States, 24 states prohibit indoor smoking whereas California, Nebraska , Arkansas , and Kentucky prohibit smoking on the entire prison grounds. In July 2004 the Federal Bureau of Prisons adopted a smoke-free policy for its facilities. The 1993 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Helling v. McKinney acknowledged that a prisoner's exposure to secondhand smoke could be regarded as cruel and unusual punishment (which would be in violation of the Eighth Amendment ). A 1997 ruling in Massachusetts established that prison smoking bans do not constitute cruel and unusual punishment. Many officials view prison smoking bans as a means of reducing health-care costs. \n\nWith the exception of Quebec , all Canadian provinces have banned smoking indoors and outdoors in all their prison facilities. Prison officials and guards are sometimes worried due to previous events in other prisons concerning riots, fostering a cigarette black market within the prison, and other problems resulting from total prison smoking restrictions. Prisons have experienced riots when placing smoking restrictions into effect resulting in prisoners setting fires and destroying prison property, and persons being assaulted, injured, and stabbed. One prison in Canada had some guards reporting breathing difficulties from the fumes of prisoners smoking artificial cigarettes made from nicotine patches lit by creating sparks from inserting metal objects into electrical outlets. For example in 2008, the Orsainville Detention Centre near Quebec City , withdrew its smoke-free provision following a riot. But the feared increase in tension and violence expected in association with smoking restrictions has generally not been experienced in practice. \n\nPrison smoking bans are also in force in New Zealand , the Isle of Man and the Australian states of Victoria , Queensland , Tasmania , Northern Territory and New South Wales. The New Zealand ban was subsequently successfully challenged in court on two occasions, resulting in a law change to maintain it. \n\nSome prisoners are getting around the prison smoking bans by producing and smoking \"teabacco\", which is nicotine patches or lozenges mixed with tea leaves, and rolled up in Bible paper. A forensic analysis of teabacco made from nicotine lozenges identified some potentially-toxic compounds, but concluded that teabacco made from nicotine lozenges may be less harmful than traditional tobacco cigarettes. \n\nThe introduction of smoking restrictions occasionally generates protests and predictions of widespread non-compliance, along with the rise of smokeasies , including in New York City, Germany, Illinois , the United Kingdom, Utah , and Washington, D.C. . \n\nHigh levels of compliance with smoke-free laws have been reported in most jurisdictions including New York, Ireland, Italy and Scotland. Poor compliance was reported in Calcutta . \n\nSmoke-free regulations and ordinances have been criticised on a number of grounds.\n\nCritics of smoke-free provisions, including musician Joe Jackson , and political essayist Christopher Hitchens , have claimed that regulation efforts are misguided. Typically, such arguments are based upon an interpretation of John Stuart Mill 's harm principle which perceives smoke-free laws as an obstacle to tobacco consumption per se, rather than a bar upon harming other people.\n\nSuch arguments, which usually refer to the notion of personal liberty, have themselves been criticised by Nobel Prize -winning economist Amartya Sen who defended smoke-free regulations on several grounds. Among other things, Sen argued that while a person may be free to acquire the habit of smoking, they thereby restrict their own freedom in the future given that the habit of smoking is hard to break. Sen also pointed out the heavy costs that smoking inevitably imposes on every society which grants smokers unrestricted access to public services (which, Sen noted, every society that is not \"monstrously unforgiving\" would do). Arguments which invoke the notion of personal liberty against smoke-free laws are thus incomplete and inadequate, according to Sen. \n\nIn New Zealand, two psychiatrist patients and a nurse took their local district health board to court, arguing a smoking ban at intensive care units violated \"human dignity\" as they were there for mental health reasons, not smoking-related illness. They argued it was \"cruel\" to deny patients cigarettes. \n\nSome critics of smoke-free laws emphasise the property rights of business owners, drawing a distinction between nominally public places (such as government buildings) and privately owned establishments (such as bars and restaurants). Citing economic efficiency, some economists suggest that the basic institutions of private property rights and contractual freedom are capable of resolving conflicts between the preferences of smokers and those who seek a smoke-free environment, without government intrusion. \n\nBusinesses affected by smoke-free regulations have filed lawsuits claiming that these are unconstitutional or otherwise illegal. In the United States, some cite unequal protection under the law while others cite loss of business without compensation, as well as other types of challenges. Some localities where hospitality businesses filed lawsuits against the state or local government include Nevada , Montana , Iowa , Colorado , Kentucky , New York, South Carolina , and Hawaii , though none have succeeded.\n\nRestrictions upon smoking in offices and other enclosed public places often result in smokers going outside to smoke, frequently congregating outside doorways. This can result in non-smokers passing through these doorways getting exposed to more secondhand smoke rather than less. [ citation needed ] Many jurisdictions that have restricted smoking in enclosed public places have extended provisions to cover areas within a fixed distance of entrances to buildings. \n\nThe former UK Secretary of State for Health John Reid claimed that restrictions upon smoking in public places may lead to more people smoking at home. However, both the House of Commons Health Committee and the Royal College of Physicians disagreed, with the former finding no evidence to support Reid's claim after studying Ireland, and the latter finding that smoke-free households increased from 22% to 37% between 1996 and 2003. \n\nIn May 2008, research published by Adams and Cotti in the Journal of Public Economics examined statistics of drunken-driving fatalities and accidents in areas where smoke-free laws have been implemented in bars and found that fatal drunken-driving accidents increased by about 13%, or about 2.5 such accidents per year for a typical county of 680,000. They speculate this could be caused by smokers driving farther away to jurisdictions without smoke-free laws or where enforcement is lax. \n\nAs in other areas of research, the effect of funding on research literature has been discussed with respect to smoke-free laws. Most commonly, studies which found few or no positive and/or negative effects of smoke-free laws and which were funded by tobacco companies have been delegitimised because of the obvious conflict of interest . \n\nProfessor of Economics at the California State Polytechnic University-San Luis Obispo , Michael L. Marlow , defended \"tobacco-sponsored\" studies arguing that all studies merited \"scrutiny and a degree of skepticism\", irrespective of their funding. He wished for the basic assumption that every author were \"fair minded and trustworthy, and deserves being heard out\" and for less attention to research funding when evaluating the results of a study. Marlow suggests that studies funded by tobacco companies are viewed and dismissed as \"deceitful\", i.e. as being driven by (conscious) bad intention .\n\nDuring the debates over the Washington, DC, smoke-free law, city council member Carol Schwartz proposed legislation that would have enacted either a substantial tax credit for businesses that chose to voluntarily restrict smoking or a quadrupling of the annual business license fee for bars, restaurants and clubs that wished to allow smoking. Additionally, locations allowing smoking would have been required to install specified high-performance ventilation systems. \n\nCritics of smoke-free laws have suggested that ventilation is a means of reducing the harmful effects of secondhand smoke. A tobacco industry-funded study conducted by the School of Technology of the University of Glamorgan in Wales , published in the Building Services Journal suggested that \"ventilation is effective in controlling the level of contamination\", although \"ventilation can only dilute or partially displace contaminants and occupational exposure limits are based on the ' as low as reasonably practicable ' principle\". \n\nSome hospitality organisations have claimed that ventilation systems could bring venues into line with smoke-free restaurant ordinances. A study published by the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers and funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation found one establishment with lower air quality in the non-smoking section, due to improperly installed ventilation systems. They also determined that even properly functioning systems \"are not substitutes for smoking bans in controlling environmental smoke exposure\". \n\nThe tobacco industry has focused on proposing ventilation as an alternative to smoke-free laws, though this approach has not been widely adopted in the U.S. because \"in the end, it is simpler, cheaper, and healthier to end smoking\". The Italian smoke-free law permits dedicated smoking rooms with automatic doors and smoke extractors. Nevertheless, few Italian establishments are creating smoking rooms due to the additional cost. \n\nA landmark report from the U.S. Surgeon General found that even the use of elaborate ventilation systems and smoking rooms fail to provide protection from the health hazards of secondhand smoke, since there is \"no safe level of secondhand smoke\". ",
  "Bob Dylan (legally Robert Dylan ; born Robert Allen Zimmerman , May 24, 1941) is an American singer-songwriter. Considered one of the greatest songwriters of all time, Dylan has been a major figure in popular culture over his nearly 70-year career. With an estimated more than 125 million records sold worldwide, he is one of the best-selling musicians of all time . Dylan added increasingly sophisticated lyrical techniques to the folk music of the early 1960s, infusing it \"with the intellectualism of classic literature and poetry\". His lyrics incorporated political, social, and philosophical influences, defying pop music conventions and appealing to the burgeoning counterculture . \n\nDylan was born in St. Louis County, Minnesota . He moved to New York City in 1961 to pursue a career in music. Following his 1962 debut album, Bob Dylan , featuring traditional folk and blues material, he released his breakthrough album The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan (1963), which included \" Girl from the North Country \" and \" A Hard Rain's a-Gonna Fall \", adapting older folk songs. His songs \" Blowin' in the Wind \" (1963) and \" The Times They Are a-Changin' \" (1964) became anthems for the civil rights and antiwar movements. In 1965 and 1966, Dylan created controversy among folk purists when he used electrically amplified rock instrumentation for his albums Bringing It All Back Home , Highway 61 Revisited (both 1965), and Blonde on Blonde (1966). His six-minute single \" Like a Rolling Stone \" (1965) expanded commercial and creative boundaries in popular music. \n\nIn July 1966, a motorcycle crash led Dylan to cease touring for seven years. During this period, he recorded a large body of songs with members of the Band which produced the album The Basement Tapes (1975). Dylan explored country music and rural themes on the albums John Wesley Harding (1967), Nashville Skyline (1969) and New Morning (1970). He gained critical attention for Blood on the Tracks (1975), and Time Out of Mind (1997), the latter of which earned him the Grammy Award for Album of the Year . Dylan still releases music and has toured continuously since the late 1980s on what has become known as the Never Ending Tour . Since 1994, Dylan has published nine books of paintings and drawings , and his work has been exhibited in major art galleries. His life has been profiled in several documentaries and the biopic A Complete Unknown (2024).\n\nDylan's numerous accolades include an Academy Award , ten Grammy Awards and a Golden Globe Award . He was honored with the Kennedy Center Honors in 1997, National Medal of Arts in 2009, and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2012. Dylan has been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Songwriters Hall of Fame . He was awarded a Pulitzer Prize special citation in 2008, and the 2016 Nobel Prize in Literature \"for having created new poetic expressions within the great American song tradition\". \n\nBob Dylan was born Robert Allen Zimmerman (his Hebrew name is Shabtai Zisl ben Avraham ) in St. Mary's Hospital on May 24, 1941, in Duluth, Minnesota . Dylan's paternal grandparents, Anna Kirghiz and Zigman Zimmerman, emigrated from Odessa in the Russian Empire (now Ukraine) to the United States, following the 1905 pogroms against Jews . His maternal grandparents, Florence and Ben Stone, were Lithuanian Jews who had arrived in the US in 1902. Dylan wrote that his paternal grandmother's family was originally from the Kağızman District of Kars Province , northeastern Turkey. \n\nDylan's father Abram Zimmerman and his mother Beatrice \"Beatty\" Stone were part of a small, close-knit Jewish community. They lived in Duluth until Dylan was six, when his father contracted polio and the family returned to his mother's hometown of Hibbing , where they lived for the rest of Dylan's childhood, and his father and paternal uncles ran a furniture and appliance store. \n\nIn the early 1950s, Dylan listened to the Grand Ole Opry radio show and heard the songs of Hank Williams . He later wrote: \"The sound of his voice went through me like an electric rod.\" Dylan was also impressed by the delivery of Johnnie Ray : \"He was the first singer whose voice and style, I guess, I totally fell in love with... I loved his style, wanted to dress like him too.\" As a teenager, Dylan heard rock and roll on radio stations broadcasting from Shreveport and Little Rock . \n\nDylan formed several bands while attending Hibbing High School . In the Golden Chords, he performed covers of songs by Little Richard and Elvis Presley . Their performance of Danny & the Juniors ' \" Rock and Roll Is Here to Stay \" at their high school talent show was so loud that the principal cut the microphone. On January 31, 1959, 17-year-old Dylan saw Buddy Holly perform at the Duluth Armory , four days before Holly's fatal plane crash. Dylan was electrified and in his Nobel Prize lecture he explained: \"Buddy wrote songs – songs that had beautiful melodies and imaginative verses. And he sang great – sang in more than a few voices. He was the archetype. Everything I wasn't and wanted to be.\" \n\nIn 1959, Dylan's high school yearbook carried the caption \"Robert Zimmerman: to join 'Little Richard ' \". That year, as Elston Gunnn, he performed twice with Bobby Vee , playing piano and clapping. In September 1959, Dylan enrolled at the University of Minnesota . Living at the Jewish-centric fraternity Sigma Alpha Mu house, Dylan began to perform at the Ten O'Clock Scholar, a coffeehouse near campus, and became involved in the Dinkytown folk music circuit. His focus on rock and roll gave way to American folk music , as he explained in a 1985 interview:\n\nThe thing about rock'n'roll is that for me anyway it wasn't enough ... There were great catch-phrases and driving pulse rhythms ... but the songs weren't serious or didn't reflect life in a realistic way. I knew that when I got into folk music, it was more of a serious type of thing. The songs are filled with more despair, more sadness, more triumph, more faith in the supernatural, much deeper feelings. \n\nDuring this period, he began to introduce himself as \"Bob Dylan\". In his memoir, he wrote that he considered adopting the surname Dillon before unexpectedly seeing poems by Dylan Thomas , and deciding upon the given name spelling. [ a 1 ] In a 2004 interview, he said, \"You're born, you know, the wrong names, wrong parents. I mean, that happens. You call yourself what you want to call yourself. This is the land of the free.\" \n\nIn May 1960, Dylan dropped out of college at the end of his first year. In January 1961, he traveled to New York City to perform and visit his musical idol Woody Guthrie at Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital in New Jersey. Guthrie had been a revelation to Dylan and influenced his early performances. He wrote of Guthrie's impact: \"The songs themselves had the infinite sweep of humanity in them... [He] was the true voice of the American spirit. I said to myself I was going to be Guthrie's greatest disciple\". In addition to Guthrie, Dylan wrote in Chronicles that major influences on his early song writing included Robert Johnson 's blues and what he called the \"architectural forms\" of Hank Williams 's country songs. \n\nFrom February 1961, Dylan played at clubs around Greenwich Village , befriending and picking up material from folk singers, including Dave Van Ronk , Fred Neil , Odetta , the New Lost City Ramblers and Irish musicians the Clancy Brothers and Tommy Makem . In September, The New York Times critic Robert Shelton boosted Dylan's career with a very enthusiastic review of his performance at Gerde's Folk City : \"Bob Dylan: A Distinctive Folk-Song Stylist\". That month, Dylan played harmonica on folk singer Carolyn Hester 's third album, bringing him to the attention of the album's producer John Hammond , who signed Dylan to Columbia Records . Dylan's debut album, Bob Dylan , released March 19, 1962, consisted of traditional folk, blues and gospel material with just two original compositions, \" Talkin' New York \" and \" Song to Woody \". The album sold 5,000 copies in its first year, just breaking even. \n\nOn August 9, 1962, Dylan legally changed his name to Robert Dylan in the St. Louis County Court , Hibbing. His father, Abraham Zimmerman, was the witness. The same month, Dylan signed a management contract with Albert Grossman . Grossman remained Dylan's manager until 1970, and was known for his sometimes confrontational personality and protective loyalty. Dylan said, \"He was kind of like a Colonel Tom Parker figure ... you could smell him coming.\" Tension between Grossman and John Hammond led to the latter suggesting Dylan work with the jazz producer Tom Wilson , who produced several tracks for the second album without formal credit. Wilson produced the next three albums Dylan recorded. \n\nDylan made his first trip to the United Kingdom from December 1962 to January 1963. He had been invited by television director Philip Saville to appear in Madhouse on Castle Street , which Saville was directing for BBC Television . At the end of the play, Dylan performed \" Blowin' in the Wind \", one of its first public performances. While in London, Dylan performed at London folk clubs, including the Troubadour , Les Cousins , and Bunjies . He also learned material from UK performers, including Martin Carthy . \n\nWith the release of Dylan's second album, The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan , in May 1963, he began to make his name as a singer-songwriter. Many songs on the album were labeled protest songs , inspired partly by Guthrie and influenced by Pete Seeger 's passion for topical songs. \" Oxford Town \" was an account of James Meredith 's ordeal as the first Black student at the University of Mississippi . The first song on the album, \"Blowin' in the Wind\", partly derived its melody from the traditional slave song \"No More Auction Block\", while its lyrics questioned the status quo. The song was widely recorded by other artists and became a hit for Peter, Paul and Mary . \" A Hard Rain's a-Gonna Fall \" was based on the folk ballad \" Lord Randall \". With its apocalyptic premonitions, the song gained resonance when the Cuban Missile Crisis developed a few weeks after Dylan began performing it. [ a 2 ] Both songs marked a new direction in songwriting, blending a stream-of-consciousness , imagist lyrical attack with traditional folk form. \n\nDylan's topical songs led to his being viewed as more than just a songwriter. Janet Maslin wrote of Freewheelin ' :\n\nThese were the songs that established [Dylan] as the voice of his generation—someone who implicitly understood how concerned young Americans felt about nuclear disarmament and the growing Civil Rights Movement : his mixture of moral authority and nonconformity was perhaps the most timely of his attributes. [ a 3 ]\n\nFreewheelin ' also included love songs and surreal talking blues . Humor was an important part of Dylan's persona, and the range of material on the album impressed listeners, including the Beatles . George Harrison said of the album: \"We just played it, just wore it out. The content of the song lyrics and just the attitude—it was incredibly original and wonderful\". \n\nThe rough edge of Dylan's singing unsettled some but attracted others. Author Joyce Carol Oates wrote: \"When we first heard this raw, very young, and seemingly untrained voice, frankly nasal, as if sandpaper could sing, the effect was dramatic and electrifying\". Many early songs reached the public through more palatable versions by other performers, such as Joan Baez , who became Dylan's advocate and lover. Baez was influential in bringing Dylan to prominence by recording several of his early songs and inviting him on stage during her concerts. Others who had hits with Dylan's songs in the early 1960s included the Byrds , Sonny & Cher , the Hollies , the Association , Manfred Mann and the Turtles .\n\n\" Mixed-Up Confusion \", recorded during the Freewheelin' sessions with a backing band, was released as Dylan's first single in December 1962, but then swiftly withdrawn. In contrast to the mostly solo acoustic performances on the album, the single showed a willingness to experiment with a rockabilly sound. Cameron Crowe described it as \"a fascinating look at a folk artist with his mind wandering towards Elvis Presley and Sun Records \". \n\nIn May 1963, Dylan's political profile rose when he walked out of The Ed Sullivan Show . During rehearsals, Dylan had been told by CBS television's head of program practices that \" Talkin' John Birch Paranoid Blues \" was potentially libelous to the John Birch Society . Rather than comply with censorship, Dylan refused to appear. \n\nDylan and Baez were prominent in the civil rights movement, singing together at the March on Washington on August 28, 1963. Dylan performed \" Only a Pawn in Their Game \" and \" When the Ship Comes In \". \n\nDylan's third album, The Times They Are a-Changin' , reflected a more politicized Dylan. The songs often took as their subject matter contemporary stories, with \" Only a Pawn in Their Game \" addressing the murder of civil rights worker Medgar Evers , and the Brechtian \" The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll \" the death of Black hotel barmaid Hattie Carroll at the hands of young White socialite William Zantzinger. \" Ballad of Hollis Brown \" and \" North Country Blues \" addressed despair engendered by the breakdown of farming and mining communities. \n\nThe final track on the album expressed Dylan's angry response to a hostile profile published in Newsweek . As biographer Clinton Heylin puts it, the profile wrote about \"the way the Bar Mitzvah boy from Hibbing, Minnesota, had reinvented himself as the prince of protest\", emphasising his birth name, his attendance at the University of Minnesota and his close relationship with his parents whom he claimed to be estranged from. The day after the article appeared, Dylan returned to the studio to record \" Restless Farewell \" which ends with his vow to \"make my stand/ And remain as I am/ And bid farewell and not give a damn\". \n\nBy the end of 1963, Dylan felt manipulated and constrained by the folk and protest movements. Accepting the \" Tom Paine Award\" from the Emergency Civil Liberties Committee three weeks after the assassination of John F. Kennedy , an intoxicated Dylan questioned the role of the committee, characterized the members as old and balding, and claimed to see something of himself and of every man in Kennedy's assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald . \n\nJohnny Cash supported Dylan in his refusal to conform when he wrote a letter to Broadside magazine in March 1964, expressing admiration for Dylan's writing and ending with the injunction: \"Shut up! And let him sing!\" When Cash died in 2003, Dylan remembered: \"Johnny wrote the magazine saying to shut up and let me sing, that I knew what I was doing. This was before I had ever met him, and the letter meant the world to me.\" Cash and Dylan met for the first time at the Newport Folk Festival in July 1964 and became friends. \n\nAnother Side of Bob Dylan , recorded in a single evening on June 9, 1964, had a lighter mood. The humorous Dylan reemerged on \" I Shall Be Free No. 10 \" and \"Motorpsycho Nightmare\". \" Spanish Harlem Incident \" and \" To Ramona \" are passionate love songs, while \" Black Crow Blues \" and \" I Don't Believe You (She Acts Like We Never Have Met) \" suggest the rock and roll soon to dominate Dylan's music. \" It Ain't Me Babe \", on the surface a song about spurned love, has been described as a rejection of the role of political spokesman thrust upon him. His new direction was signaled by two lengthy songs: the impressionistic \" Chimes of Freedom \", which sets social commentary against a metaphorical landscape in a style characterized by Allen Ginsberg as \"chains of flashing images,\" [ a 4 ] and \" My Back Pages \", which attacks the simplistic seriousness of his own earlier topical songs and seems to predict the backlash he was about to encounter from his former champions. \n\nIn late 1964 and early 1965, Dylan moved from folk songwriter to folk-rock pop-music star. His jeans and work shirts were replaced by a Carnaby Street wardrobe, sunglasses day or night, and pointed \" Beatle boots \". A London reporter noted \"Hair that would set the teeth of a comb on edge. A loud shirt that would dim the neon lights of Leicester Square . He looks like an undernourished cockatoo .\" Dylan began to spar with interviewers. Asked about a movie he planned while on Les Crane 's television show, he told Crane it would be a \"cowboy horror movie\". Asked if he played the cowboy, Dylan replied, \"No, I play my mother.\" \n\nDylan's late March 1965 album, Bringing It All Back Home , was another leap, featuring his first recordings with electric instruments, under producer Tom Wilson's guidance. The first single, \" Subterranean Homesick Blues \", owed much to Chuck Berry 's \" Too Much Monkey Business \"; its free-association lyrics described as harking back to the energy of beat poetry and as a forerunner of rap and hip-hop . The song was provided with an early music video, which opened D. A. Pennebaker 's cinéma vérité presentation of Dylan's 1965 British tour, Dont Look Back . Instead of miming, Dylan illustrated the lyrics by throwing cue cards containing key words on the ground. Pennebaker said the sequence was Dylan's idea, and it has been imitated in music videos and advertisements. \n\nThe second side of Bringing It All Back Home contained four long songs on which Dylan accompanied himself on acoustic guitar and harmonica. \" Mr. Tambourine Man \" became one of his best-known songs when The Byrds recorded an electric version that reached number one in the US and UK. \" It's All Over Now, Baby Blue \" and \" It's Alright, Ma (I'm Only Bleeding) \" were two of Dylan's most important compositions. \n\nIn 1965, headlining the Newport Folk Festival , Dylan performed his first electric set since high school with a pickup group featuring Mike Bloomfield on guitar and Al Kooper on organ. Dylan had appeared at Newport in 1963 and 1964, but in 1965 was met with cheering and booing and left the stage after three songs. One version has it that the boos were from folk fans whom Dylan had alienated by appearing, unexpectedly, with an electric guitar. Murray Lerner , who filmed the performance, said: \"I absolutely think that they were booing Dylan going electric.\" An alternative account claims audience members were upset by poor sound and a short set. \n\nDylan's performance provoked a hostile response from the folk music establishment. In the September issue of Sing Out! , Ewan MacColl wrote: \"Our traditional songs and ballads are the creations of extraordinarily talented artists working inside disciplines formulated over time ...'But what of Bobby Dylan?' scream the outraged teenagers ... Only a completely non-critical audience, nourished on the watery pap of pop music, could have fallen for such tenth-rate drivel\". On July 29, four days after Newport, Dylan was back in the studio in New York, recording \" Positively 4th Street \". The lyrics contained images of vengeance and paranoia, and have been interpreted as Dylan's put-down of former friends from the folk community he had known in clubs along West 4th Street . \n\nHighway 61 Revisited and Blonde on Blonde\n\nIn July 1965, Dylan's six-minute single \" Like a Rolling Stone \" peaked at number two in the US chart. In 2004 and in 2011, Rolling Stone listed it as number one on \" The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time \". Bruce Springsteen recalled first hearing the song: \"that snare shot sounded like somebody'd kicked open the door to your mind.\" The song opened Dylan's next album, Highway 61 Revisited , named after the road that led from Dylan's Minnesota to the musical hotbed of New Orleans . The songs were in the same vein as the hit single, flavored by Mike Bloomfield's blues guitar and Al Kooper's organ riffs. \" Desolation Row \", backed by acoustic guitar and understated bass, offers the sole exception, with Dylan alluding to figures in Western culture in a song described by Andy Gill as \"an 11-minute epic of entropy, which takes the form of a Fellini-esque parade of grotesques and oddities featuring a huge cast of celebrated characters\". Poet Philip Larkin , who also reviewed jazz for The Daily Telegraph , wrote \"I'm afraid I poached Bob Dylan's Highway 61 Revisited (CBS) out of curiosity and found myself well rewarded.\" \n\nIn support of the album, Dylan was booked for two US concerts with Al Kooper and Harvey Brooks from his studio crew and Robbie Robertson and Levon Helm , former members of Ronnie Hawkins 's backing band the Hawks . On August 28 at Forest Hills Tennis Stadium, the group was heckled by an audience still annoyed by Dylan's electric sound, though their reception on September 3 at the Hollywood Bowl was more favorable. \n\nFrom September 24, 1965, in Austin, Texas, Dylan toured the US and Canada for six months, backed by the five musicians from the Hawks who became known as the Band . While Dylan and the Hawks met increasingly receptive audiences, their studio efforts floundered. Producer Bob Johnston persuaded Dylan to record in Nashville in February 1966, and surrounded him with top-notch session men. At Dylan's insistence, Robertson and Kooper came from New York City to play on the sessions. The Nashville sessions produced the double album Blonde on Blonde (1966), featuring what Dylan called \"that thin wild mercury sound\". Kooper described it as \"taking two cultures and smashing them together with a huge explosion\": the musical worlds of Nashville and of the \"quintessential New York hipster\" Bob Dylan. \n\nOn November 22, 1965, Dylan quietly married 25-year-old former model Sara Lownds . Some of Dylan's friends, including Ramblin' Jack Elliott, say that, immediately after the event, Dylan denied he was married. Writer Nora Ephron made the news public in the New York Post in February 1966 with the headline \"Hush! Bob Dylan is wed\". \n\nDylan toured Australia and Europe in April and May 1966. Each show was split in two. Dylan performed solo during the first half, accompanying himself on acoustic guitar and harmonica. In the second, backed by the Hawks, he played electrically amplified music. This contrast provoked many fans, who jeered and slow clapped . The tour culminated in a raucous confrontation between Dylan and his audience at the Manchester Free Trade Hall in England on May 17, 1966. A recording of this concert was released in 1998: The Bootleg Series Vol. 4: Bob Dylan Live 1966 . At the climax of the evening, a member of the audience, angered by Dylan's electric backing, shouted: \" Judas !\" to which Dylan responded, \"I don't believe you ... You're a liar!\" Dylan turned to his band and said, \"Play it fucking loud!\" \n\nDuring his 1966 tour, Dylan was described as exhausted and acting \"as if on a death trip\". D. A. Pennebaker, the filmmaker accompanying the tour, described Dylan as \"taking a lot of amphetamine and who-knows-what-else\". In a 1969 interview with Jann Wenner , Dylan said, \"I was on the road for almost five years. It wore me down. I was on drugs, a lot of things ... just to keep going, you know?\" \n\nOn July 29, 1966, Dylan crashed his motorcycle, a Triumph Tiger 100 , near his home in Woodstock, New York . Dylan said he broke several vertebrae in his neck. The circumstances of the accident are unclear since no ambulance was called to the scene and Dylan was not hospitalized. Dylan's biographers have written that the crash offered him the chance to escape the pressures around him. Dylan concurred: \"I had been in a motorcycle accident and I'd been hurt, but I recovered. Truth was that I wanted to get out of the rat race.\" He made very few public appearances, and did not tour again for almost eight years. \n\nOnce Dylan was well enough to resume creative work, he began to edit D. A. Pennebaker's film of his 1966 tour. A rough cut was shown to ABC Television, but they rejected it as incomprehensible to mainstream audiences. The film, titled Eat the Document on bootleg copies, has since been screened at a few film festivals. Secluded from public gaze, Dylan recorded over 100 songs during 1967 at his Woodstock home and in the basement of the Hawks' nearby house, \" Big Pink \". These songs were initially offered as demos for other artists to record and were hits for Julie Driscoll , the Byrds, and Manfred Mann. The public heard these recordings when Great White Wonder , the first \" bootleg recording \", appeared in West Coast shops in July 1969, containing Dylan material recorded in Minneapolis in 1961 and seven Basement Tapes songs. This record gave birth to a minor industry in the illicit release of recordings by Dylan and other major rock artists. Columbia released a Basement selection in 1975 as The Basement Tapes .\n\nIn late 1967, Dylan returned to studio recording in Nashville, accompanied by Charlie McCoy on bass, Kenny Buttrey on drums and Pete Drake on steel guitar. The result was John Wesley Harding , a record of short songs thematically drawing on the American West and the Bible . The sparse structure and instrumentation, with lyrics that took the Judeo-Christian tradition seriously, was a departure from Dylan's previous work. It included \" All Along the Watchtower \", famously covered by Jimi Hendrix . [ a 5 ] Woody Guthrie died in October 1967, and Dylan made his first live appearance in twenty months at a memorial concert held at Carnegie Hall on January 20, 1968, where he was backed by the Band. \n\nNashville Skyline (1969), featured Nashville musicians, a mellow-voiced Dylan, a duet with Johnny Cash and the single \" Lay Lady Lay \". Variety wrote, \"Dylan is definitely doing something that can be called singing. Somehow he has managed to add an octave to his range.\" During one recording session, Dylan and Cash recorded a series of duets, but only their version of \" Girl from the North Country \" appeared on the album. The album influenced the nascent genre of country rock . \n\nIn 1969, Dylan was asked to write songs for Scratch , Archibald MacLeish 's musical adaptation of \" The Devil and Daniel Webster \". MacLeish initially praised Dylan's contributions, writing to him \"Those songs of yours have been haunting me—and exciting me,\" but creative differences led to Dylan leaving the project. Some of the songs were later recorded by Dylan in a revised form. In May 1969, Dylan appeared on the first episode of The Johnny Cash Show where he sang a duet with Cash on \"Girl from the North Country\" and played solos of \"Living the Blues\" and \" I Threw It All Away \". Dylan traveled to England to top the bill at the Isle of Wight Festival on August 31, 1969, after rejecting overtures to appear at the Woodstock Festival closer to home. \n\nIn the early 1970s, critics charged that Dylan's output was varied and unpredictable. Greil Marcus asked \"What is this shit?\" upon first hearing Self Portrait , released in June 1970. It was a double LP including few original songs and was poorly received. In October 1970, Dylan released New Morning , considered a return to form. The title track was from Dylan's ill-fated collaboration with MacLeish, and \"Day of the Locusts\" was his account of receiving an honorary degree from Princeton University on June 9, 1970. In November 1968, Dylan co-wrote \" I'd Have You Anytime \" with George Harrison; Harrison recorded that song and Dylan's \" If Not for You \" for his album All Things Must Pass . Olivia Newton-John covered \"If Not For You\" on her debut album and \" The Man in Me \" was prominently featured in the film The Big Lebowski (1998).\n\nTarantula , a freeform book of prose-poetry, had been written by Dylan during a creative burst in 1964–65. Dylan shelved his book for several years, apparently uncertain of its status, until he suddenly informed Macmillan at the end of 1970 that the time had come to publish it. The book attracted negative reviews but later critics have suggested its affinities with Finnegans Wake and A Season in Hell . \n\nBetween March 16 and 19, 1971, Dylan recorded with Leon Russell at Blue Rock , a small studio in Greenwich Village. These sessions resulted in \" Watching the River Flow \" and a new recording of \" When I Paint My Masterpiece \". On November 4, 1971, Dylan recorded \" George Jackson \", which he released a week later. For many, the single was a surprising return to protest material, mourning the killing of Black Panther George Jackson in San Quentin State Prison . Dylan's surprise appearance at Harrison's Concert for Bangladesh on August 1, 1971, attracted media coverage as his live appearances had become rare. \n\nIn 1972, Dylan joined Sam Peckinpah 's film Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid , providing the soundtrack and playing \"Alias\", a member of Billy's gang. Despite the film's failure at the box office, \" Knockin' on Heaven's Door \" became one of Dylan's most covered songs. That same year, Dylan protested the move to deport John Lennon and Yoko Ono , who had been convicted for marijuana possession, by sending a letter to the US Immigration Service which read in part: \"Hurray for John & Yoko. Let them stay and live here and breathe. The country's got plenty of room and space. Let John and Yoko stay!\" \n\nDylan began 1973 by signing with a new label, David Geffen 's Asylum Records , when his contract with Columbia Records expired. His next album, Planet Waves , was recorded in the fall of 1973, using the Band as his backing group as they rehearsed for a major tour. The album included two versions of \"Forever Young\" , which became one of his most popular songs. As one critic described it, the song projected \"something hymnal and heartfelt that spoke of the father in Dylan\", and Dylan said \"I wrote it thinking about one of my boys and not wanting to be too sentimental\". Columbia Records simultaneously released Dylan , a collection of studio outtakes, widely interpreted as a churlish response to Dylan's signing with a rival record label. \n\nIn January 1974, Dylan, backed by the Band, embarked on a North American tour of 40 concerts—his first tour for seven years. A live double album, Before the Flood , was released on Asylum Records. Soon, according to Clive Davis , Columbia Records sent word they \"will spare nothing to bring Dylan back into the fold\". Dylan had second thoughts about Asylum, unhappy that Geffen had sold only 600,000 copies of Planet Waves despite millions of unfulfilled ticket requests for the 1974 tour; he returned to Columbia Records, which reissued his two Asylum albums. \n\nAfter the tour, Dylan and his wife became estranged. He filled three small notebooks with songs about relationships and ruptures, and recorded the album Blood on the Tracks in September 1974. Dylan delayed the album's release and re-recorded half the songs at Sound 80 Studios in Minneapolis with production assistance from his brother, David Zimmerman. Released in early 1975, Blood on the Tracks received mixed reviews. In NME , Nick Kent described the \"accompaniments\" as \"often so trashy they sound like mere practice takes\". In Rolling Stone , Jon Landau wrote that \"the record has been made with typical shoddiness\". Over the years critics came to see it as one of Dylan's masterpieces. In Salon , journalist Bill Wyman wrote:\n\nBlood on the Tracks is his only flawless album and his best produced; the songs, each of them, are constructed in disciplined fashion. It is his kindest album and most dismayed, and seems in hindsight to have achieved a sublime balance between the logorrhea-plagued excesses of his mid-1960s output and the self-consciously simple compositions of his post-accident years. \n\nIn the middle of 1975, Dylan championed boxer Rubin \"Hurricane\" Carter , imprisoned for triple murder, with his ballad \" Hurricane \" making the case for Carter's innocence. Despite its length—over eight minutes—the song was released as a single, peaking at 33 on the US Billboard chart , and performed at every 1975 date of Dylan's next tour, the Rolling Thunder Revue . [ a 6 ] Running through late 1975 and again through early 1976, the tour featured about one hundred performers and supporters from the Greenwich Village folk scene, among them Ramblin' Jack Elliott, T-Bone Burnett , Joni Mitchell , David Mansfield , Roger McGuinn , Mick Ronson , Ronee Blakely , Joan Baez and Scarlet Rivera , whom Dylan discovered walking down the street, her violin case on her back. The tour encompassed the January 1976 release of the album Desire . Many of Desire' s songs featuring a travelogue -like narrative style, influenced by Dylan's new collaborator, playwright Jacques Levy . The 1976 half of the tour was documented by a TV concert special, Hard Rain , and the LP Hard Rain .\n\nThe 1975 tour with the Revue provided the backdrop to Dylan's film Renaldo and Clara , a sprawling narrative mixed with concert footage and reminiscences. Actor and playwright Sam Shepard accompanied the Revue and was to serve as screenwriter, but much of the film was improvised. Released in 1978, it received negative, sometimes scathing, reviews. Later in the year, a two-hour edit, dominated by the concert performances, was more widely released. In November 1976, Dylan appeared at the Band's farewell concert with Eric Clapton , Muddy Waters , Van Morrison , Neil Young and Joni Mitchell. Martin Scorsese 's 1978 film of the concert, The Last Waltz , included most of Dylan's set. \n\nIn 1978, Dylan embarked on a year-long world tour , performing 114 shows in Japan, the Far East, Europe and North America, to a total audience of two million. Dylan assembled an eight-piece band and three backing singers. Concerts in Tokyo in February and March were released as the live double album Bob Dylan at Budokan . Reviews were mixed. Robert Christgau awarded the album a C+ rating, while Janet Maslin defended it: \"These latest live versions of his old songs have the effect of liberating Bob Dylan from the originals\". When Dylan brought the tour to the US in September 1978, the press described the look and sound as a \"Las Vegas Tour\". The 1978 tour grossed more than $20 million, and Dylan told the Los Angeles Times that he had debts because \"I had a couple of bad years. I put a lot of money into the movie, built a big house ... and it costs a lot to get divorced in California.\" In April and May 1978, Dylan took the same band and vocalists into Rundown Studios in Santa Monica , California, to record an album of new material, Street-Legal . It was described by Michael Gray as \"after Blood On The Tracks , arguably Dylan's best record of the 1970s: a crucial album documenting a crucial period in Dylan's own life\". However, it had poor sound and mixing (attributed to Dylan's studio practices), muddying the instrumental detail until a remastered CD release in 1999 restored some of the songs' strengths. \n\nIn the late 1970s, Dylan converted to Evangelical Christianity , undertaking a three-month discipleship course run by the Association of Vineyard Churches . He released three albums of contemporary gospel music . Slow Train Coming (1979) featured Dire Straits guitarist Mark Knopfler and was produced by veteran R&B producer Jerry Wexler . Wexler said that Dylan had tried to evangelize him during the recording. He replied: \"Bob, you're dealing with a 62-year-old Jewish atheist. Let's just make an album.\" Dylan won the Grammy Award for Best Male Rock Vocal Performance for the song \" Gotta Serve Somebody \". When touring in late 1979 and early 1980, Dylan would not play his older, secular works, and he delivered declarations of his faith from the stage, such as:\n\nYears ago they ... said I was a prophet. I used to say, \"No I'm not a prophet\", they say \"Yes you are, you're a prophet.\" I said, \"No it's not me.\" They used to say \"You sure are a prophet.\" They used to convince me I was a prophet. Now I come out and say Jesus Christ is the answer. They say, \"Bob Dylan's no prophet.\" They just can't handle it. \n\nDylan's Christianity was unpopular with some fans and musicians. John Lennon, shortly before being murdered , recorded \"Serve Yourself\" in response to \"Gotta Serve Somebody\". In 1981, Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times that \"neither age (he's now 40) nor his much-publicized conversion to born-again Christianity has altered his essentially iconoclastic temperament\". \n\nIn late 1980, Dylan briefly played concerts billed as \"A Musical Retrospective\", restoring popular 1960s songs to the repertoire. His second Christian album, Saved (1980), received mixed reviews, described by Michael Gray as \"the nearest thing to a follow-up album Dylan has ever made, Slow Train Coming II and inferior\". His third Christian album was Shot of Love (1981). The album featured his first secular compositions in more than two years, mixed with Christian songs. The lyrics of \"Every Grain of Sand\" recall William Blake 's \" Auguries of Innocence \". Elvis Costello wrote that \" Shot of Love may not be your favorite Bob Dylan record, but it might contain his best song: 'Every Grain of Sand'.\" \n\nReception of Dylan's 1980s recordings varied. Gray criticized Dylan's 1980s albums for carelessness in the studio and for failing to release his best songs. Infidels (1983) employed Knopfler again as lead guitarist and also as producer; the sessions resulted in several songs that Dylan left off the album. Best regarded of these were \" Blind Willie McTell \", which was both a tribute to the eponymous blues musician and an evocation of African American history , \"Foot of Pride\" and \" Lord Protect My Child \". These three songs were later released on The Bootleg Series Volumes 1–3 (Rare & Unreleased) 1961–1991 . \n\nBetween July 1984 and March 1985, Dylan recorded Empire Burlesque . Arthur Baker , who had remixed hits for Bruce Springsteen and Cyndi Lauper , was asked to engineer and mix the album. Baker said he felt he was hired to make Dylan's album sound \"a little bit more contemporary\". In 1985 Dylan sang on USA for Africa 's famine relief single \" We Are the World \". He also joined Artists United Against Apartheid , providing vocals for their single \" Sun City \". On July 13, 1985, he appeared at the Live Aid concert at JFK Stadium , Philadelphia. Backed by Keith Richards and Ronnie Wood , he performed a ragged version of \"Ballad of Hollis Brown\", a tale of rural poverty, and then said to the worldwide audience: \"I hope that some of the money ... maybe they can just take a little bit of it, maybe ... one or two million, maybe ... and use it to pay the mortgages on some of the farms and, the farmers here, owe to the banks\". His remarks were widely criticized as inappropriate, but inspired Willie Nelson to organize a concert, Farm Aid , to benefit debt-ridden American farmers. \n\nIn October 1985, Dylan released Biograph , a box set featuring 53 tracks, 18 of them previously unreleased. Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote: \"Historically, Biograph is significant not for what it did for Dylan's career, but for establishing the box set, complete with hits and rarities, as a viable part of rock history.\" Biograph also contained liner notes by Cameron Crowe in which Dylan discussed the origins of some of his songs. \n\nIn April 1986, Dylan made a foray into rap when he added vocals to the opening verse of \"Street Rock\" on Kurtis Blow 's album Kingdom Blow . Dylan's next studio album, Knocked Out Loaded (1986), contained three covers (by Junior Parker , Kris Kristofferson and the gospel hymn \" Precious Memories \"), plus three collaborations (with Tom Petty , Sam Shepard and Carole Bayer Sager ), and two solo compositions by Dylan. A reviewer wrote:\n\nthe record follows too many detours to be consistently compelling, and some of those detours wind down roads that are indisputably dead ends. By 1986, such uneven records weren't entirely unexpected by Dylan, but that didn't make them any less frustrating. \n\nIt was the first Dylan album since his 1962 debut to fail to make the Top 50. Some critics have called the song Dylan co-wrote with Shepard, \" Brownsville Girl \", a masterpiece. \n\nIn 1986 and 1987, Dylan toured with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers , sharing vocals with Petty on several songs each night. Dylan also toured with the Grateful Dead in 1987, resulting in the live album Dylan & The Dead , which received negative reviews; Erlewine said it was \"quite possibly the worst album by either Bob Dylan or the Grateful Dead\". Dylan initiated what came to be called the Never Ending Tour on June 7, 1988, performing with a back-up band featuring guitarist G. E. Smith . Dylan would continue to tour with a small, changing band for the next 30 years. In 1987, Dylan starred in Richard Marquand 's movie Hearts of Fire , in which he played Billy Parker, a washed-up rock star turned chicken farmer whose teenage lover ( Fiona ) leaves him for a jaded English synth-pop sensation ( Rupert Everett ). Dylan also contributed two original songs to the soundtrack—\"Night After Night\", and \"Had a Dream About You, Baby\", as well as a cover of John Hiatt 's \"The Usual\". The film was a critical and commercial flop. \n\nDylan was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in January 1988. Bruce Springsteen, in his introduction, declared, \"Bob freed your mind the way Elvis freed your body. He showed us that just because music was innately physical did not mean that it was anti-intellectual\". Down in the Groove (1988) sold even more poorly than Knocked Out Loaded . Gray wrote: \"The very title undercuts any idea that inspired work may lie within. Here was a further devaluing of the notion of a new Bob Dylan album as something significant.\" The critical and commercial disappointment of that album was swiftly followed by the success of the Traveling Wilburys , a supergroup Dylan co-founded with George Harrison, Jeff Lynne , Roy Orbison and Tom Petty. In late 1988, their Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1 reached number three on the US albums chart, featuring songs described as Dylan's most accessible in years. Despite Orbison's death in December 1988, the remaining four recorded a second album in May 1990, Traveling Wilburys Vol. 3 . \n\nDylan finished the decade on a critical high note with Oh Mercy , produced by Daniel Lanois . Gray praised the album as \"Attentively written, vocally distinctive, musically warm, and uncompromisingly professional, this cohesive whole is the nearest thing to a great Bob Dylan album in the 1980s.\" \" Most of the Time \", a lost-love composition, was prominently featured in the film High Fidelity (2000), while \" What Was It You Wanted \" has been interpreted both as a catechism and a wry comment on the expectations of critics and fans. The religious imagery of \"Ring Them Bells\" struck some critics as a re-affirmation of faith. \n\nDylan's 1990s began with Under the Red Sky (1990), an about-face from the serious Oh Mercy . It contained several apparently simple songs, including \"Under the Red Sky\" and \"Wiggle Wiggle\". The album was dedicated to \"Gabby Goo Goo\", a nickname for the daughter of Dylan and Carolyn Dennis , Desiree Gabrielle Dennis-Dylan, who was four. Musicians on the album included George Harrison, Slash , David Crosby , Bruce Hornsby , Stevie Ray Vaughan , and Elton John . The record received negative reviews and sold poorly. In 1990 and 1991 Dylan was described by his biographers as drinking heavily, impairing his performances on stage. In an interview with Rolling Stone , Dylan dismissed allegations that drinking was interfering with his music: \"That's completely inaccurate. I can drink or not drink. I don't know why people would associate drinking with anything I do, really\". \n\nDefilement and remorse were themes Dylan addressed when he received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award from Jack Nicholson in February 1991. The event coincided with the start of the Gulf War and Dylan played \" Masters of War \"; Rolling Stone called his performance \"almost unintelligible\". He made a short speech: \"My daddy once said to me, he said, 'Son, it is possible for you to become so defiled in this world that your own mother and father will abandon you. If that happens, God will believe in your ability to mend your own ways ' \". This was a paraphrase of 19th-century Orthodox Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch 's commentary on Psalm 27. On October 16, 1992, the thirtieth anniversary of Dylan's debut album was celebrated with a concert at Madison Square Garden , christened \"Bobfest\" by Neil Young and featuring John Mellencamp , Stevie Wonder , Lou Reed , Eddie Vedder , Dylan and others. It was recorded as the live album The 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration . \n\nOver the next few years Dylan returned to his roots with two albums covering traditional folk and blues songs: Good as I Been to You (1992) and World Gone Wrong (1993), backed solely by his acoustic guitar. Many critics and fans noted the quiet beauty of the song \"Lone Pilgrim\", written by a 19th-century teacher. In August 1994, he played at Woodstock '94 ; Rolling Stone called his performance \"triumphant\". In November, Dylan recorded two live shows for MTV Unplugged . He said his wish to perform traditional songs was overruled by Sony executives who insisted on hits. The resulting album, MTV Unplugged , included \"John Brown\" , an unreleased 1962 song about how enthusiasm for war ends in mutilation and disillusionment. \n\nWith a collection of songs reportedly written while snowed in on his Minnesota ranch, Dylan booked recording time with Daniel Lanois at Miami's Criteria Studios in January 1997. The subsequent recording sessions were, by some accounts, fraught with musical tension. Before the album's release Dylan was hospitalized with life-threatening pericarditis , brought on by histoplasmosis . His scheduled European tour was canceled, but Dylan made a speedy recovery and left the hospital saying, \"I really thought I'd be seeing Elvis soon\". He was back on the road by mid-year, and performed before Pope John Paul II at the World Eucharistic Conference in Bologna , Italy. The Pope treated the audience of 200,000 to a homily based on Dylan's \"Blowin' in the Wind\". \n\nIn September, Dylan released the new Lanois-produced album, Time Out of Mind . With its bitter assessments of love and morbid ruminations, Dylan's first collection of original songs in seven years was highly acclaimed. Alex Ross called it \"a thrilling return to form\". \" Cold Irons Bound \" won Dylan another Grammy For Best Male Rock Vocal Performance, and the album won him his first Grammy Award for Album of the Year . The album's first single, \" Not Dark Yet \", has been called one of Dylan's best songs and \" Make You Feel My Love \" was covered by Billy Joel , Garth Brooks , Adele and others. Elvis Costello said \"I think it might be the best record he's made.\" \n\nIn 2001, Dylan won an Academy Award for Best Original Song for \" Things Have Changed \", written for the film Wonder Boys . \"Love and Theft\" was released on September 11, 2001. Recorded with his touring band, Dylan produced the album under the alias Jack Frost. Critics noted that Dylan was widening his musical palette to include rockabilly , Western swing , jazz and lounge music . The album won the Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album . Controversy ensued when The Wall Street Journal pointed out similarities between the album's lyrics and Junichi Saga 's book Confessions of a Yakuza . Saga was not familiar with Dylan's work, but said he was flattered. Upon hearing the album, Saga said of Dylan: \"His lines flow from one image to the next and don't always make sense. But they have a great atmosphere.\" \n\nIn 2003, Dylan revisited the evangelical songs from his Christian period and participated in the project Gotta Serve Somebody: The Gospel Songs of Bob Dylan . That year, Dylan released Masked & Anonymous , which he co-wrote with director Larry Charles under the alias Sergei Petrov. Dylan starred as Jack Fate, alongside a cast that included Jeff Bridges , Penélope Cruz and John Goodman . The film polarized critics. In The New York Times , A. O. Scott called it as an \"incoherent mess\"; a few treated it as a serious work of art. \n\nIn 2004, Dylan published the first part of his memoir, Chronicles: Volume One . Confounding expectations, Dylan devoted three chapters to his first year in New York City in 1961–1962, virtually ignoring the mid-1960s when his fame was at its height, while devoting chapters to the albums New Morning (1970) and Oh Mercy (1989). The book reached number two on The New York Times' Hardcover Non-Fiction bestseller list in December 2004 and was nominated for a National Book Award . \n\nCritics noted that Chronicles contained many examples of pastiche and borrowing; sources included Time magazine and the novels of Jack London . Biographer Clinton Heylin queried the veracity of Dylan's autobiography, noting \"Not a single checkable story held water; not one anecdote couldn't be shot full of holes by any half-decent researcher.\" \n\nMartin Scorsese's Dylan documentary No Direction Home was broadcast on September 26–27, 2005, on BBC Two in the UK and as part of American Masters on PBS in the US. It covers the period from Dylan's arrival in New York in 1961 to his motorcycle crash in 1966, featuring interviews with Suze Rotolo , Liam Clancy , Joan Baez, Allen Ginsberg, Pete Seeger, Mavis Staples and Dylan himself. The film earned a Peabody Award and a Columbia-duPont Award . The accompanying soundtrack featured unreleased songs from Dylan's early years. \n\nDylan's career as a radio presenter began on May 3, 2006, with his weekly program, Theme Time Radio Hour , on XM Satellite Radio . He played songs with a common theme, such as \"Weather\", \"Weddings\", \"Dance\" and \"Dreams\". Dylan's records ranged from Muddy Waters to Prince , L.L. Cool J to the Streets . Dylan's show was praised for the breadth of his musical selections and for his jokes, stories and eclectic references. In April 2009, Dylan broadcast the 100th show in his radio series; the theme was \"Goodbye\" and he signed off with Woody Guthrie's \" So Long, It's Been Good to Know Yuh \". \n\nDylan released Modern Times in August 2006. Despite some coarsening of Dylan's voice (a critic for The Guardian characterized his singing on the album as \"a catarrhal death rattle\" ) most reviewers praised the album, and many described it as the final installment of a successful trilogy, encompassing Time Out of Mind and \"Love and Theft\" . Modern Times entered the US charts at number one, making it Dylan's first album to reach that position since 1976's Desire . The New York Times published an article exploring similarities between some of Dylan's lyrics in Modern Times and the work of the Civil War poet Henry Timrod . Modern Times won the Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album and Dylan won Best Solo Rock Vocal Performance for \"Someday Baby\". Modern Times was named Album of the Year by Rolling Stone and Uncut . On the same day that Modern Times was released, the iTunes Music Store released Bob Dylan: The Collection , a digital box set containing all of his albums (773 tracks), along with 42 rare and unreleased tracks. \n\nOn October 1, 2007, Columbia Records released the triple CD retrospective Dylan , anthologizing his entire career under the Dylan 07 logo. The sophistication of the Dylan 07 marketing campaign was a reminder that Dylan's commercial profile had risen considerably since the 1990s. This became evident in 2004, when Dylan appeared in a TV advertisement for Victoria's Secret . In October 2007, he participated in a multi-media campaign for the 2008 Cadillac Escalade . In 2009 he gave the highest profile endorsement of his career to date, appearing with rapper will.i.am in a Pepsi ad that debuted during Super Bowl XLIII . The ad opened with Dylan singing the first verse of \"Forever Young\" followed by will.i.am doing a hip hop version of the song's final verse. \n\nThe Bootleg Series Vol. 8 – Tell Tale Signs was released in October 2008, as both a two-CD set and a three-CD version with a 150-page hardcover book. The set contains live performances and outtakes from selected studio albums from Oh Mercy to Modern Times , as well as soundtrack contributions and collaborations with David Bromberg and Ralph Stanley . The pricing of the album—the two-CD set went on sale for $18.99 and the three-CD version for $129.99—led to complaints about \"rip-off packaging\". The release was widely acclaimed by critics. The abundance of alternative takes and unreleased material suggested to one reviewer that this volume of old outtakes \"feels like a new Bob Dylan record, not only for the astonishing freshness of the material, but also for the incredible sound quality and organic feeling of everything here\". \n\nDylan released Together Through Life on April 28, 2009. In a conversation with music journalist Bill Flanagan, Dylan explained it originated when French director Olivier Dahan asked him to supply a song for his movie My Own Love Song . He initially intended to record a single track, \"Life Is Hard\", but \"the record sort of took its own direction\". Nine of the album's ten songs are credited as co-written by Dylan and Robert Hunter . The album received largely favorable reviews, although several critics described it as a minor addition to Dylan's canon. In its first week of release, the album reached number one on the Billboard 200 chart in the US, making Dylan, at 67 years of age, the oldest artist to ever debut at number one on that chart. \n\nDylan's Christmas in the Heart was released in October 2009, comprising such Christmas standards as \" Little Drummer Boy \", \" Winter Wonderland \" and \" Here Comes Santa Claus \". Edna Gundersen wrote that Dylan was \"revisiting yuletide styles popularized by Nat King Cole , Mel Tormé , and the Ray Conniff Singers \". Dylan's royalties from the album were donated to the charities Feeding America in the US, Crisis in the UK, and the World Food Programme . The album received generally favorable reviews. In an interview published in The Big Issue , Flanagan asked Dylan why he had performed the songs in a straightforward style, and he replied: \"There wasn't any other way to play it. These songs are part of my life, just like folk songs. You have to play them straight too.\" \n\nVolume 9 of Dylan's Bootleg Series, The Witmark Demos , was issued in October 18, 2010. It comprised 47 demo recordings of songs taped between 1962 and 1964 for Dylan's earliest music publishers: Leeds Music in 1962, and Witmark Music from 1962 to 1964. One reviewer described the set as \"a hearty glimpse of young Bob Dylan changing the music business, and the world, one note at a time.\" On the critical aggregator Metacritic , the album has a score of 86, indicating \"universal acclaim\". In the same week, Sony Legacy released Bob Dylan: The Original Mono Recordings , a box set that presented Dylan's eight earliest albums, from Bob Dylan (1962) to John Wesley Harding (1967), in their original mono mix in the CD format for the first time. The set was accompanied by a booklet featuring an essay by Greil Marcus. \n\nOn April 12, 2011, Legacy Recordings released Bob Dylan in Concert – Brandeis University 1963 , taped at Brandeis University on May 10, 1963, two weeks before the release of The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan . The tape was discovered in the archive of music writer Ralph J. Gleason , and the recording carries liner notes by Michael Gray, who says it captures Dylan\n\nfrom way back when Kennedy was President and the Beatles hadn't yet reached America. It reveals him not at any Big Moment but giving a performance like his folk club sets of the period ... This is the last live performance we have of Bob Dylan before he becomes a star. \n\nOn Dylan's 70th birthday, three universities organized symposia on his work: the University of Mainz , the University of Vienna , and the University of Bristol invited literary critics and cultural historians to give papers on aspects of Dylan's work. Other events, including tribute bands, discussions and simple singalongs, took place around the world, as reported in The Guardian : \"From Moscow to Madrid, Norway to Northampton and Malaysia to his home state of Minnesota, self-confessed 'Bobcats' will gather today to celebrate the 70th birthday of a giant of popular music.\" \n\nDylan's 35th studio album, Tempest , was released on September 11, 2012. The album features a tribute to John Lennon, \" Roll On John \", and the title track is a 14-minute song about the sinking of the Titanic . In Rolling Stone , Will Hermes gave Tempest five out of five stars, writing: \"Lyrically, Dylan is at the top of his game, joking around, dropping wordplay and allegories that evade pat readings and quoting other folks' words like a freestyle rapper on fire\". \n\nVolume 10 of Dylan's Bootleg Series, Another Self Portrait (1969–1971) , was released in August 2013. The album contained 35 previously unreleased tracks, including alternative takes and demos from Dylan's 1969–1971 recording sessions during the making of the Self Portrait and New Morning albums. The box set also included a live recording of Dylan's performance with the Band at the Isle of Wight Festival in 1969. Thom Jurek wrote, \"For fans, this is more than a curiosity, it's an indispensable addition to the catalog.\" Columbia Records released a boxed set containing all 35 Dylan studio albums, six albums of live recordings and a collection of non-album material ( Sidetracks ) as Bob Dylan: Complete Album Collection: Vol. One , in November 2013. To publicize the box set, a video of \"Like a Rolling Stone\" was released on Dylan's website. The interactive video, created by director Vania Heymann , allowed viewers to switch between 16 simulated TV channels, all featuring characters who are lip-synching the lyrics. \n\nDylan appeared in a commercial for the Chrysler 200 car which aired during the 2014 Super Bowl . In it, he says that \"Detroit made cars and cars made America... So let Germany brew your beer, let Switzerland make your watch, let Asia assemble your phone. We will build your car.\" Dylan's ad was criticized for its protectionist implications, and people wondered whether he had \" sold out \". The Lyrics: Since 1962 was published by Simon & Schuster in the fall of 2014. The book was edited by literary critic Christopher Ricks , Julie Nemrow and Lisa Nemrow and offered variant versions of Dylan's songs, sourced from out-takes and live performances. A limited edition of 50 books, signed by Dylan, was priced at $5,000. \"It's the biggest, most expensive book we've ever published, as far as I know\", said Jonathan Karp, Simon & Schuster's president and publisher. A comprehensive edition of the Basement Tapes, songs recorded by Dylan and the Band in 1967, was released as The Bootleg Series Vol. 11: The Basement Tapes Complete in November 2014. The album included 138 tracks in a six-CD box; the 1975 album The Basement Tapes contained just 24 tracks from the material which Dylan and the Band had recorded at their homes in Woodstock, New York in 1967. Subsequently, over 100 recordings and alternate takes had circulated on bootleg records. The sleeve notes are by author Sid Griffin . The Basement Tapes Complete won the Grammy Award for Best Historical Album . The box set earned a score of 99 on Metacritic. \n\nIn February 2015, Dylan released Shadows in the Night , featuring ten songs written between 1923 and 1963, which have been described as part of the Great American Songbook . All of the songs had been recorded by Frank Sinatra , but both critics and Dylan himself cautioned against seeing the record as a collection of \"Sinatra covers\". Dylan explained: \"I don't see myself as covering these songs in any way. They've been covered enough. Buried, as a matter a fact. What me and my band are basically doing is uncovering them. Lifting them out of the grave and bringing them into the light of day\". Critics praised the restrained instrumental backings and the quality of Dylan's singing. The album debuted at number one in the UK Albums Chart in its first week of release. The Bootleg Series Vol. 12: The Cutting Edge 1965–1966 , consisting of previously unreleased material from the three albums Dylan recorded between January 1965 and March 1966 ( Bringing It All Back Home , Highway 61 Revisited and Blonde on Blonde ) was released in November 2015. The set was released in three formats: a 2-CD \"Best Of\" version, a 6-CD \"Deluxe edition\", and an 18-CD \"Collector's Edition\". On Dylan's website the \"Collector's Edition\" was described as containing \"every single note recorded by Bob Dylan in the studio in 1965/1966\". The Best of the Cutting Edge entered the Billboard Top Rock Albums chart at number one on November 18, based on its first-week sales. \n\nDylan released Fallen Angels , described as \"a direct continuation of the work of 'uncovering' the Great Songbook that he began on Shadows In the Night \", in May. The album contained twelve songs by classic songwriters such as Harold Arlen , Sammy Cahn and Johnny Mercer , eleven of which had been recorded by Sinatra. Jim Farber wrote in Entertainment Weekly : \"Tellingly, [Dylan] delivers these songs of love lost and cherished not with a burning passion but with the wistfulness of experience. They're memory songs now, intoned with a present sense of commitment. Released just four days ahead of his 75th birthday, they couldn't be more age-appropriate\". The 1966 Live Recordings , including every known recording of Dylan's 1966 concert tour, was released in November 2016. The recordings commence with the concert in White Plains New York on February 5, 1966, and end with the Royal Albert Hall concert in London on May 27. The New York Times reported most of the concerts had \"never been heard in any form\", and described the set as \"a monumental addition to the corpus\". \n\nIn March 2017, Dylan released a triple album of 30 more recordings of classic American songs, Triplicate . Dylan's 38th studio album was recorded in Hollywood's Capitol Studios and features his touring band. Dylan posted a long interview on his website to promote the album, and was asked if this material was an exercise in nostalgia.\n\nNostalgic? No I wouldn't say that. It's not taking a trip down memory lane or longing and yearning for the good old days or fond memories of what's no more. A song like 'Sentimental Journey' is not a way back when song, it doesn't emulate the past, it's attainable and down to earth, it's in the here and now. \n\nCritics praised the thoroughness of Dylan's exploration of the Great American Songbook, though, in the opinion of Uncut , \"For all its easy charms, Triplicate labours its point to the brink of overkill. After five albums' worth of croon toons, this feels like a fat full stop on a fascinating chapter.\" The next volume of Dylan's Bootleg Series revisited his \"Born Again\" Christian period of 1979 to 1981, described by Rolling Stone as \"an intense, wildly controversial time that produced three albums and some of the most confrontational concerts of his long career\". Reviewing the box set The Bootleg Series Vol. 13: Trouble No More 1979–1981 , comprising 8 CDs and 1 DVD, Jon Pareles wrote in The New York Times :\n\nDecades later, what comes through these recordings above all is Mr. Dylan's unmistakable fervor, his sense of mission. The studio albums are subdued, even tentative, compared with what the songs became on the road. Mr. Dylan's voice is clear, cutting and ever improvisational; working the crowds, he was emphatic, committed, sometimes teasingly combative. And the band tears into the music. \n\nTrouble No More includes a DVD of a film directed by Jennifer Lebeau consisting of live footage of Dylan's gospel performances interspersed with sermons delivered by actor Michael Shannon .\n\nIn April 2018, Dylan made a contribution to the compilation EP Universal Love , a collection of reimagined wedding songs for the LGBT community. The album was funded by MGM Resorts International and the songs are intended to function as \"wedding anthems for same-sex couples\". Dylan recorded the 1929 song \" She's Funny That Way \", changing the gender pronoun to \"He's Funny That Way\". The song was previously recorded by Billie Holiday and Frank Sinatra. That same month, The New York Times reported that Dylan was launching Heaven's Door, a range of three whiskeys . The Times described the venture as \"Mr. Dylan's entry into the booming celebrity-branded spirits market, the latest career twist for an artist who has spent five decades confounding expectations\". Dylan has been involved in both the creation and the marketing of the range; on September 21, 2020, Dylan resurrected Theme Time Radio Hour with a two-hour special with the theme of \"Whiskey\". On November 2, 2018, Dylan released More Blood, More Tracks as Volume 14 in the Bootleg Series. The set comprises all Dylan's recordings for Blood On the Tracks and was issued as a single CD and also as a six-CD Deluxe Edition. \n\nIn 2019, Netflix released Rolling Thunder Revue: A Bob Dylan Story by Martin Scorsese , billed as \"Part documentary, part concert film, part fever dream\". The film received largely positive reviews but also aroused controversy because it mixed documentary footage filmed during the Rolling Thunder Revue in the fall of 1975 with fictitious characters and stories. Coinciding with the film release, the box set The Rolling Thunder Revue: The 1975 Live Recordings , was released by Columbia Records. The set comprises five full Dylan performances from the tour and recently discovered tapes from Dylan's tour rehearsals. The box set received an aggregate score of 89 on Metacritic, indicating \"universal acclaim\". The next installment of Dylan's Bootleg Series, Bob Dylan (featuring Johnny Cash) – Travelin' Thru, 1967 – 1969: The Bootleg Series Vol. 15 , was released on November 1. The set comprises outtakes from Dylan's albums John Wesley Harding and Nashville Skyline , and songs that Dylan recorded with Johnny Cash in Nashville in 1969 and with Earl Scruggs in 1970. \n\nRough and Rowdy Ways\n\nOn March 26, 2020, Dylan released \" Murder Most Foul \", a seventeen-minute song revolving around the Kennedy assassination , on his YouTube channel. Billboard reported on April 8 that \"Murder Most Foul\" had topped the Billboard Rock Digital Song Sales Chart, the first time that Dylan had scored a number one song on a pop chart under his own name. Three weeks later, on April 17, 2020, Dylan released another new song, \" I Contain Multitudes \". The title is from Walt Whitman 's poem \" Song of Myself \". On May 7, Dylan released a third single, \" False Prophet \", accompanied by the news that the three songs would all appear on a forthcoming double album.\n\nRough and Rowdy Ways , Dylan's 39th studio album and his first album of original material since 2012, was released on June 19 to favorable reviews. Alexis Petridis wrote: \"For all its bleakness, Rough and Rowdy Ways might well be Bob Dylan's most consistently brilliant set of songs in years: the die-hards can spend months unravelling the knottier lyrics, but you don't need a PhD in Dylanology to appreciate its singular quality and power.\" Rob Sheffield wrote: \"While the world keeps trying to celebrate him as an institution, pin him down, cast him in the Nobel Prize canon, embalm his past, this drifter always keeps on making his next escape. On Rough and Rowdy Ways , Dylan is exploring terrain nobody else has reached before—yet he just keeps pushing on into the future\". The album earned a score of 95 on Metacritic, indicating \"universal acclaim\". In its first week of release Rough and Rowdy Ways reached number one on the UK album chart, making Dylan \"the oldest artist to score a No. 1 of new, original material\". \n\nIn December 2020, it was announced that Dylan had sold his entire song catalog to Universal Music Publishing Group , including both the income he receives as a songwriter and his control of their copyright. Universal, a division of the French media conglomerate Vivendi , will collect all future income from the songs. The New York Times stated Universal had purchased the copyright to over 600 songs and the price was \"estimated at more than $300 million\", although other reports suggested the figure was closer to $400 million. \n\nIn February 2021, Columbia Records released 1970 , a three-CD set of recordings from the Self Portrait and New Morning sessions, including the entirety of the session Dylan recorded with George Harrison on May 1, 1970. Dylan's 80th birthday was commemorated by a virtual conference, Dylan@80, organized by the University of Tulsa Institute for Bob Dylan Studies. The program featured seventeen sessions over three days delivered by over fifty international scholars, journalists and musicians. Several new biographies and studies of Dylan were published. \n\nIn July 2021, livestream platform Veeps presented a 50-minute performance by Dylan, Shadow Kingdom: The Early Songs of Bob Dylan . Filmed in black and white with a film noir look, Dylan performed 13 songs in a club setting with an audience. The performance was favorably reviewed, and one critic suggested the backing band resembled the style of the musical Girl from the North Country . The soundtrack to the film was released on 2 LP and CD formats in June 2023. In September, Dylan released Springtime in New York: The Bootleg Series Vol. 16 (1980–1985) , issued in 2 LP, 2 CD and 5 CD formats. It comprised rehearsals, live recordings, out-takes and alternative takes from Shot of Love , Infidels and Empire Burlesque . In The Daily Telegraph , Neil McCormick wrote: \"These bootleg sessions remind us that Dylan's worst period is still more interesting than most artists' purple patches\". Springtime in New York received an aggregate score of 85 on Metacritic. \n\nOn July 7, 2022, Christie's , London, auctioned a 2021 recording of Dylan singing \"Blowin' in the Wind\". The record was in an innovative \"one of one\" recording medium, branded as Ionic Original, which producer T Bone Burnett claimed \"surpasses the sonic excellence and depth for which analogue sound is renowned, while at the same time boasting the durability of a digital recording.\" The recording fetched GBP £1,482,000—equivalent to $1,769,508. In November, Dylan published The Philosophy of Modern Song , a collection of 66 essays on songs by other artists. The New Yorker described it as \"a rich, riffy, funny, and completely engaging book of essays\". Other reviewers praised the book's eclectic outlook, while some questioned its variations in style and dearth of female songwriters. \n\nIn January 2023, Dylan released The Bootleg Series Vol. 17: Fragments – Time Out of Mind Sessions (1996–1997) in multiple formats. The 5-CD version comprised a re-mix of the 1997 album \"to sound more like how the songs came across when the musicians originally played them in the room\" without the effects and processing which producer Daniel Lanois applied later; 25 previously unreleased out-takes from the studio sessions; and a disc of live performances of each song on the album performed by Dylan and his band in concert. On November 17, 2023, Dylan released The Complete Budokan 1978 , containing the full recordings of the February 28 and March 1 Tokyo concerts from his 1978 Tour. \n\nDylan contributed a cover version of Cole Porter 's song \" Don't Fence Me In \" to the soundtrack of the biographical film Reagan , which was released on August 30, 2024. On September 20, 2024, Dylan released The 1974 Live Recordings , a 27-disc CD boxset of recordings from the 1974 Bob Dylan & The Band tour, featuring 417 previously unreleased live tracks. \n\nThe Never Ending Tour commenced on June 7, 1988. Dylan has played roughly 100 dates a year since, a heavier schedule than most performers who started in the 1960s. By April 2019, Dylan and his band had played more than 3,000 shows, anchored by long-time bassist Tony Garnier . \n\nTo the dismay of some of his audience, Dylan's performances are unpredictable as he often alters his arrangements and changes his vocal approach. These variable performances have divided critics. Richard Williams and Andy Gill argued that Dylan has found a successful way to present his rich legacy of material. Others have criticized his live performances for changing \"the greatest lyrics ever written so that they are effectively unrecognisable\", and giving so little to the audience that \"it is difficult to understand what he is doing on stage at all\". \n\nIn September 2021, Dylan's touring company announced a series of tours which were billed as the \" Rough and Rowdy Ways World Wide Tour, 2021–2024 \". The Rough and Rowdy Ways World Tour replaced Dylan's varied set lists with a more stable repertory, performing nine of the ten songs on his 2020 album . Nevertheless, the tour has been referred to by the media as an extension of his ongoing Never Ending Tour. \n\nIn February 2025, Dylan announced that he would undertake a U.S. leg of his Rough and Rowdy Ways World Wide Tour, commencing in Tulsa, Oklahoma on March 25, and ending in Williamsport, Pennsylvania on April 22. It was also announced that Dylan would take part in the Outlaw Music Festival 2025 Tour, appearing alongside Willie Nelson and other artists, beginning on May 13 in Phoenix, Arizona , and finishing on September 19 in East Troy, Wisconsin . Alex Ross has summarised Dylan's touring career: \"his shows cause his songs to mutate, so that no definitive or ideal version exists. Dylan's legacy will be the sum of thousands of performances, over many decades ... Every night, whether he's in good or bad form, he says, in effect, 'Think again.'\" \n\nEcho Helstrom was Dylan's high school girlfriend. The couple listened together to rhythm-and-blues on the radio, and her family exposed him to singers such as Jimmie Rodgers on 78 RPM records , and a range of folk music magazines, sheet music, and manuscripts. Helstrom is believed by some to be the inspiration for Dylan's song \" Girl from the North Country \", though this is disputed. \n\nDylan's first serious relationship was with artist Suze Rotolo , a daughter of Communist Party USA radicals. According to Dylan, \"She was the most erotic thing I'd ever seen ... The air was suddenly filled with banana leaves. We started talking and my head started to spin\". Rotolo was photographed arm-in-arm with Dylan on the cover of his album The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan . Critics have connected Rotolo to some of Dylan's early love songs, including \" Don't Think Twice It's All Right \". The relationship ended in 1964. In 2008, Rotolo published a memoir about her life in Greenwich Village and relationship with Dylan in the 1960s, A Freewheelin' Time . \n\nWhen Joan Baez met Dylan in April 1961, she had already released her first album and was acclaimed as the \"Queen of Folk\". On hearing Dylan perform his song \" With God on Our Side \", Baez later said, \"I never thought anything so powerful could come out of that little toad\". In July 1963, Baez invited Dylan to join her on stage at the Newport Folk Festival, setting the scene for similar duets over the next two years. By the time of Dylan's 1965 tour of the UK, their romantic relationship had begun to fizzle out, as captured in D. A. Pennebaker's documentary film Dont Look Back . Baez later toured with Dylan as a performer on his Rolling Thunder Revue in 1975–76. Baez also starred as \"The Woman In White\" in the film Renaldo and Clara (1978), directed by Dylan. Dylan and Baez toured together again in 1984 with Carlos Santana . \n\nBaez recalled her relationship with Dylan in Martin Scorsese 's documentary film No Direction Home (2005). Baez wrote about Dylan in two autobiographies—admiringly in Daybreak (1968), and less admiringly in And A Voice to Sing With (1987). Her song \" Diamonds & Rust \" has been described as \"an acute portrait\" of Dylan. \n\nDylan married Sara Lownds , who had worked as a model and secretary at Drew Associates , on November 22, 1965. They had four children: Jesse Byron (born January 6, 1966), Anna Lea (born July 11, 1967), Samuel Isaac Abram (born July 30, 1968), and Jakob Luke (born December 9, 1969). Dylan also adopted Sara's daughter from a prior marriage, Maria Lownds (later Dylan, born October 21, 1961). Sara Dylan played the role of Clara in Dylan's film Renaldo and Clara (1978). Bob and Sara Dylan were divorced on June 29, 1977. \n\nDylan and his backing singer Carolyn Dennis (often professionally known as Carol Dennis) have a daughter, Desiree Gabrielle Dennis-Dylan, born on January 31, 1986. The couple were married on June 4, 1986, and divorced in October 1992. Their marriage and child remained a closely guarded secret until the publication of Howard Sounes 's biography Down the Highway: The Life of Bob Dylan , in 2001. \n\nWhen not touring, Dylan is believed to live primarily in Point Dume , on the coast of Malibu, California , though he owns property around the world. \n\nGrowing up in Hibbing, Minnesota, Dylan and his family were part of the area's small, close-knit Jewish community, and Dylan had his bar mitzvah in May 1954. Around the time of his 30th birthday, in 1971, Dylan visited Israel, and also met Rabbi Meir Kahane , founder of the New York-based Jewish Defense League . \n\nIn the late 1970s, Dylan converted to Christianity. In November 1978, guided by his friend Mary Alice Artes, Dylan made contact with the Vineyard School of Discipleship . Vineyard Pastor Kenn Gulliksen recalled: \"Larry Myers and Paul Emond went over to Bob's house and ministered to him. He responded by saying yes, he did in fact want Christ in his life. And he prayed that day and received the Lord\". From January to March 1979, Dylan attended Vineyard's Bible study classes in Reseda, California . \n\nBy 1984, Dylan was distancing himself from the \" born again \" label. He told Kurt Loder of Rolling Stone : \"I've never said I'm 'born again'. That's just a media term. I don't think I've been an agnostic. I've always thought there's a superior power, that this is not the real world and that there's a world to come.\" In 1997, he told David Gates of Newsweek :\n\nHere's the thing with me and the religious thing. This is the flat-out truth: I find the religiosity and philosophy in the music. I don't find it anywhere else. Songs like \"Let Me Rest on a Peaceful Mountain\" or \" I Saw the Light \"—that's my religion. I don't adhere to rabbis, preachers, evangelists, all of that. I've learned more from the songs than I've learned from any of this kind of entity. The songs are my lexicon. I believe the songs. \n\nDylan has supported the Chabad Lubavitch movement, and has privately participated in Jewish religious events, including his sons' bar mitzvahs and services at Hadar Hatorah , a Chabad Lubavitch yeshiva . In 1989 and 1991, he appeared on the Chabad telethon . \n\nDylan has continued to perform songs from his gospel albums in concert, occasionally covering traditional religious songs. He has made passing references to his religious faith, such as in a 2004 interview with 60 Minutes , when he told Ed Bradley , \"the only person you have to think twice about lying to is either yourself or to God\". He explained his constant touring schedule as part of a bargain he made a long time ago with the \"chief commander—in this earth and in the world we can't see\". \n\nSpeaking to Jeff Slate of The Wall Street Journal in December 2022, Dylan reaffirmed his religious outlook: \"I read the scriptures a lot, meditate and pray, light candles in church. I believe in damnation and salvation as well as predestination . The Five Books of Moses , Pauline Epistles , Invocation of the Saints , all of it.\" \n\nDylan has been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame and Songwriters Hall of Fame . In 1997, US President Bill Clinton presented Dylan with a Kennedy Center Honor in the East Room of the White House , saying: \"He probably had more impact on people of my generation than any other creative artist. His voice and lyrics haven't always been easy on the ear, but throughout his career Bob Dylan has never aimed to please. He's disturbed the peace and discomforted the powerful\". In May 2000, Dylan received the Polar Music Prize from Sweden's King Carl XVI . In June 2007, Dylan received the Prince of Asturias Award in the Arts category; the jury called him \"a living myth in the history of popular music and a light for a generation that dreamed of changing the world.\" In 2008, the Pulitzer Prize jury awarded him a special citation for \"his profound impact on popular music and American culture, marked by lyrical compositions of extraordinary poetic power\". \n\nDylan received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in May 2012. President Barack Obama , presenting Dylan with the award, said \"There is not a bigger giant in the history of American music.\" Obama praised Dylan's voice for its \"unique gravelly power that redefined not just what music sounded like but the message it carried and how it made people feel\". In November 2013, Dylan was awarded France's highest honor, the Légion d'Honneur , despite the misgiving of the grand chancellor of the Légion, who had declared him unworthy. In February 2015, Dylan accepted the MusiCares Person of the Year award from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences , in recognition of his philanthropic and artistic contributions. \n\nNobel Prize in Literature\n\nIn 1996, Gordon Ball of the Virginia Military Institute nominated Dylan for the Nobel Prize in Literature , initiating a campaign that lasted for 20 years. On October 13, 2016, the Nobel committee announced that it would be awarding Dylan the prize \"for having created new poetic expressions within the great American song tradition\". The New York Times reported: \"Mr. Dylan, 75, is the first musician to win the award, and his selection on Thursday is perhaps the most radical choice in a history stretching back to 1901.\" Dylan remained silent for days after receiving the award, and then told journalist Edna Gundersen that it was \"amazing, incredible. Whoever dreams about something like that?\" Dylan's Nobel Lecture was posted on the Nobel Prize website on June 5, 2017. Horace Engdahl , a member of the Nobel Committee, described Dylan's place in literary history:\n\na singer worthy of a place beside the Greek bards, beside Ovid , beside the Romantic visionaries , beside the kings and queens of the blues , beside the forgotten masters of brilliant standards . \n\nDylan has been described as one of the most influential figures of the 20th century, musically and culturally. He was included in the Time 100: The Most Important People of the Century , where he was called \"master poet, caustic social critic and intrepid, guiding spirit of the counterculture generation\". Paul Simon suggested that Dylan's early compositions virtually took over the folk genre: \"[Dylan's] early songs were very rich ... with strong melodies. 'Blowin' in the Wind' has a really strong melody. He so enlarged himself through the folk background that he incorporated it for a while. He defined the genre for a while.\" \n\nFor many critics, Dylan's greatest achievement was the cultural synthesis exemplified by his mid-1960s trilogy of albums— Bringing It All Back Home , Highway 61 Revisited and Blonde on Blonde . In Mike Marqusee 's words:\n\nBetween late 1964 and the middle of 1966, Dylan created a body of work that remains unique. Drawing on folk, blues, country, R&B, rock'n'roll, gospel, British beat , symbolist , modernist and Beat poetry, surrealism and Dada , advertising jargon and social commentary, Fellini and Mad magazine , he forged a coherent and original artistic voice and vision. The beauty of these albums retains the power to shock and console. \n\nMichael Gray initiated serious critical scrutiny when he published Song & Dance Man: The Art of Bob Dylan in 1972, situating Dylan's work in the context of the English literary tradition, Donne , Browning and T. S. Eliot . Also in 1972, Craig McGregor published Bob Dylan: A Retrospective , an anthology containing critical essays about Dylan by Robert Shelton , Nat Hentoff , Ellen Willis and other contemporary cultural critics. In 1998, Stanford University sponsored the first international academic conference on Bob Dylan held in the United States. In 2004, Richard F. Thomas , Classics professor at Harvard University , created a freshman seminar titled \"Dylan\", which aimed \"to put the artist in context of not just popular culture of the last half-century, but the tradition of classical poets like Virgil and Homer .\" Thomas went on to publish Why Bob Dylan Matters , exploring Dylan's connections with Greco-Roman literature . \n\nLiterary critic Christopher Ricks published Dylan's Visions of Sin , an appreciation of Dylan's work. Following Dylan's Nobel win, Ricks reflected: \"I'd not have written a book about Dylan, to stand alongside my books on Milton and Keats , Tennyson and T.S. Eliot, if I didn't think Dylan a genius of and with language.\" The critical consensus that Dylan's songwriting was his outstanding creative achievement was articulated by Encyclopædia Britannica : \"Hailed as the Shakespeare of his generation, Dylan ... set the standard for lyric writing.\" Former British poet laureate Andrew Motion said Dylan's lyrics should be studied in schools. His lyrics have entered the vernacular; Edna Gundersen notes that\n\nLines that branded Dylan a poet and counterculture valedictorian in the '60s are imprinted on the culture: \"When you got nothing, you got nothing to lose\"; \"a hard rain's a-gonna fall\"; \"to live outside the law you must be honest.\" Some lyrics — \"you don't need a weather man to know which way the wind blows\" and \"the times they are a-changin' \" — appear in Bartlett's Familiar Quotations . \n\nRolling Stone ranked Dylan first on its 2015 list of the 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time , fifteenth on its 2023 list of the Greatest Singers of All Time, and placed \" Like A Rolling Stone \" first on their list of greatest songs in 2004 and 2011. He was listed second on the magazine's list of the hundred greatest artists . The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll writes that \"His lyrics—the first in rock to be seriously regarded as literature—became so well known that politicians from Jimmy Carter to Václav Havel have cited them as an influence.\" \n\nDylan's voice also received critical attention. Robert Shelton described his early vocal style as \"a rusty voice suggesting Guthrie's old performances, etched in gravel like Dave Van Ronk 's\". His voice continued to develop as he began to work with rock'n'roll backing bands; Michael Gray described the sound of Dylan's vocal work on \" Like a Rolling Stone \" as \"at once young and jeeringly cynical\". As Dylan's voice aged during the 1980s, for some critics, it became more expressive. Christophe Lebold writes in the journal Oral Tradition :\n\nDylan's more recent broken voice enables him to present a world view at the sonic surface of the songs—this voice carries us across the landscape of a broken, fallen world. The anatomy of a broken world in \" Everything is Broken \" (on the album Oh Mercy ) is but an example of how the thematic concern with all things broken is grounded in a concrete sonic reality. \n\nAmong musicians who have acknowledged his influence are John Lennon , Paul McCartney , Jerry Garcia , Pete Townshend , Syd Barrett , Tim Buckley , Joni Mitchell , Neil Young , Bruce Springsteen , David Bowie , Bryan Ferry , Patti Smith , Joe Strummer , Bono , Nick Cave , Leonard Cohen , Tom Waits , Ole Paus and Chuck D . Dylan significantly contributed to the initial success of both the Byrds and the Band : the Byrds achieved chart success with their version of \" Mr. Tambourine Man \" and the subsequent album , while the Band were Dylan's backing band on his 1966 tour , recorded The Basement Tapes with him in 1967 and featured three previously unreleased Dylan songs on their debut album . Johnny Cash , introducing \"Wanted Man\", said \"I don't have to tell you who Bob Dylan is—the greatest writer of our time.\" \n\nSome critics have dissented from the view of Dylan as a visionary figure in popular music. In his book Awopbopaloobop Alopbamboom , Nik Cohn objected: \"I can't take the vision of Dylan as seer, as teenage messiah, as everything else he's been worshipped as. The way I see him, he's a minor talent with a major gift for self-hype\". Australian critic Jack Marx credited Dylan with changing the persona of the rock star: \"What cannot be disputed is that Dylan invented the arrogant, faux-cerebral posturing that has been the dominant style in rock since, with everyone from Mick Jagger to Eminem educating themselves from the Dylan handbook\". \n\nFellow musicians have also expressed critical views. Joni Mitchell described Dylan as a \"plagiarist\" and his voice as \"fake\" in a 2010 interview in the Los Angeles Times . Mitchell's comments led to discussions on Dylan's use of other people's material, both supporting and criticizing him. Talking to Mikal Gilmore in Rolling Stone in 2012, Dylan responded to the allegation of plagiarism, including his use of Henry Timrod's verse in his album Modern Times , by saying that it was \"part of the tradition\". [ a 7 ]\n\nDylan's music has inspired artists in other fields. Dave Gibbons recalls how he and Alan Moore were inspired by the lines of \" Desolation Row \" beginning \"At midnight, all the agents/ And the superhuman crew...\":\n\nIt was a glimpse, a mere fragment of something; something ominous, paranoid and threatening. But something that showed that comics, like poetry or rock and roll or Bob Dylan himself, might feasibly become part of the greater cultural continuum. The lines must have also lodged in Alan's consciousness for, nearly twenty years later, Dylan's words eventually provided the title of the first issue of our comic book series Watchmen . \n\nIn 2007, Todd Haynes released I'm Not There , \"inspired by the music and many lives of Bob Dylan\". The movie used six actors, Christian Bale , Cate Blanchett , Marcus Carl Franklin , Richard Gere , Heath Ledger and Ben Whishaw , to explore different facets of Dylan's life. Dylan's previously unreleased 1967 song from which the film takes its name was included on the original soundtrack along with covers of Dylan songs by such diverse artists as Sonic Youth , Calexico and Yo La Tengo . Irish playwright Conor McPherson wrote and directed the musical Girl from the North Country , which used Dylan's songs to tell the stories of characters during the Depression years, set in Dylan's birthplace, Duluth, Minnesota . The play premiered in London in 2017. \n\nIf Dylan's work in the 1960s was seen as bringing intellectual ambition to popular music, critics in the 21st century described him as a figure who had greatly expanded the folk culture from which he initially emerged. In his review of I'm Not There , J. Hoberman wrote:\n\nElvis might never have been born, but someone else would surely have brought the world rock 'n' roll. No such logic accounts for Bob Dylan. No iron law of history demanded that a would-be Elvis from Hibbing, Minnesota, would swerve through the Greenwich Village folk revival to become the world's first and greatest rock 'n' roll beatnik bard and then—having achieved fame and adoration beyond reckoning—vanish into a folk tradition of his own making. \n\nDylan's rise to stardom, from his arrival in New York in 1961 to his controversial performance at Newport in 1965 , was portrayed by the feature film A Complete Unknown , which opened in the U.S. on December 25, 2024. The film garnered generally favorable reviews, with praise for actor Timothée Chalamet as Dylan. \n\nThe sale of Dylan's archive of about 6,000 notebooks, drafts of lyrics, recordings, and correspondence to the George Kaiser Family Foundation and the University of Tulsa was announced in March 2016. The sale price was \"an estimated $15 million to $20 million\". To house the archive, the Bob Dylan Center in Tulsa, Oklahoma opened on May 10, 2022. \n\nIn 2005, 7th Avenue East in Hibbing, Minnesota, where Dylan lived from ages 6 to 18, received the honorary name Bob Dylan Drive. In 2006, the 1.8 miles (2.9 km) Bob Dylan Way cultural path was inaugurated in Duluth, Minnesota; it links \"cultural and historically significant areas of downtown for the tourists\". \n\nIn 2015, a 160-foot-wide Dylan mural by Brazilian street artist Eduardo Kobra was unveiled in downtown Minneapolis. \n\nIn December 2013, the Fender Stratocaster which Dylan had played at the 1965 Newport Folk Festival fetched $965,000, the second highest price paid for a guitar. In June 2014, Dylan's hand-written lyrics of \"Like a Rolling Stone\" fetched $2 million at auction, a record for a popular music manuscript. \n\nDylan's visual art was first seen by the public via a painting he contributed for the cover of the Band 's Music from Big Pink album in 1968. The cover of Dylan's own 1970 album Self Portrait features the painting of a human face by Dylan. More of Dylan's artwork was revealed with the 1973 publication of his book Writings and Drawings . The cover of Dylan's 1974 album Planet Waves again featured one of his paintings. In 1994 Random House published Drawn Blank , a book of Dylan's drawings. In 2007, the first public exhibition of Dylan's paintings, The Drawn Blank Series , opened at the Kunstsammlungen in Chemnitz , Germany; it showcased more than 200 watercolors and gouaches made from the original drawings. The exhibition coincided with the publication of Bob Dylan: The Drawn Blank Series , which includes 170 reproductions from the series. From September 2010 until April 2011, the National Gallery of Denmark exhibited 40 large-scale acrylic paintings by Dylan, The Brazil Series . \n\nIn July 2011, a leading contemporary art gallery, Gagosian Gallery , announced their representation of Dylan's paintings. An exhibition of Dylan's art, The Asia Series , opened at the Gagosian Madison Avenue Gallery on September 20, displaying Dylan's paintings of scenes in China and the Far East. The New York Times reported that \"some fans and Dylanologists have raised questions about whether some of these paintings are based on the singer's own experiences and observations, or on photographs that are widely available and were not taken by Mr. Dylan\". The Times pointed to close resemblances between Dylan's paintings and historic photos of Japan and China, and photos taken by Dmitri Kessel and Henri Cartier-Bresson . Art critic Blake Gopnik has defended Dylan's artistic practice, arguing: \"Ever since the birth of photography, painters have used it as the basis for their works: Edgar Degas and Édouard Vuillard and other favorite artists—even Edvard Munch —all took or used photos as sources for their art, sometimes barely altering them\". The Magnum photo agency confirmed that Dylan had licensed the reproduction rights of these photographs. \n\nDylan's second show at the Gagosian Gallery, Revisionist Art , opened in November 2012. The show consisted of thirty paintings, transforming and satirizing popular magazines, including Playboy and Babytalk . In February 2013, Dylan exhibited the New Orleans Series of paintings at the Palazzo Reale in Milan. In August 2013, Britain's National Portrait Gallery, London hosted Dylan's first major UK exhibition, Face Value , featuring twelve pastel portraits. \n\nIn November 2013, the Halcyon Gallery in London mounted Mood Swings , an exhibition of seven wrought iron gates Dylan had made. In a statement released by the gallery, Dylan said\n\nI've been around iron all my life ever since I was a kid. I was born and raised in iron ore country, where you could breathe it and smell it every day. Gates appeal to me because of the negative space they allow. They can be closed but at the same time they allow the seasons and breezes to enter and flow. They can shut you out or shut you in. And in some ways there is no difference. \n\nIn November 2016, the Halcyon Gallery featured a collection of artworks by Dylan. The exhibition, The Beaten Path , depicted American landscapes and urban scenes, inspired by Dylan's travels across the US. The show was reviewed by Vanity Fair and Asia Times Online . In October 2018, the Halcyon Gallery mounted an exhibition of Dylan's drawings, Mondo Scripto . The works consisted of Dylan hand-written lyrics of his songs, with each song illustrated by a drawing. \n\nRetrospectrum , the largest retrospective of Dylan's visual art to date, consisting of over 250 works in various media, debuted at the Modern Art Museum in Shanghai in 2019. Building on the exhibition in China, a version of Retrospectrum , which includes a new series of paintings, \"Deep Focus\", drawn from film imagery, opened at the Frost Art Museum in Miami on November 30, 2021. \n\nSince 1994, Dylan has published nine books of paintings and drawings . In November 2022, Dylan apologized for using an autopen to sign books and artwork which were subsequently sold as \"hand-signed\" since 2019. \n\nDylan has published Tarantula , a work of prose poetry ; Chronicles: Volume One , the first part of his memoirs; several books of the lyrics of his songs, and nine books of his art. Dylan's third full length book, The Philosophy of Modern Song , which contains 66 essays on songs by other artists, was published on November 1, 2022. Dylan has also been the subject of numerous biographies and critical studies.",
  "A music publisher is a type of publisher that specializes in distributing music . Music publishers originally published sheet music . When copyright became legally protected, music publishers began to play a role in the management of the intellectual property of composers. Today, music publishers are responsible for licensing compositions, collecting royalties, and ensuring that songwriters and composers are compensated for the use of their work.\n\nThe term \"music publisher\" originally referred to publishers who issued hand-copied or printed sheet music.\n\nExamples of music publishers actively in business as of June 2019 [update] include:\n\nIn the music industry , a music publisher or publishing company is responsible for ensuring that songwriters and composers receive payment when their compositions are used commercially. Through an agreement called a publishing contract , a songwriter or composer assigns the copyright of their composition to a publishing company. In return, the company licenses compositions, helps monitor where compositions are used, collects royalties , and distributes them to the composers. They also secure commissions for music and promote existing compositions to recording artists , film, and television. \n\nThe copyrights owned and administered by publishing companies are one of the most important forms of intellectual property in the music industry. The other is the copyright on a master recording , which is typically owned by a record company . Publishing companies play a central role in managing this vital asset.\n\nSuccessful songwriters and composers maintain a relationship with a publishing company defined by a publishing contract. Publishers also sometimes provide substantial advances against future income. In return, the publishing company receives a percentage, which can be as high as 50% and varies for different kinds of royalty.\n\nThere are several types of royalty:\n\nPublishers also work to link new songs by songwriters with suitable recording artists to record them and to place writers' songs in other media such as movie soundtracks and commercials . They will typically also handle copyright registration and \"ownership\" matters for the composer. Music print publishers also supervise the issue of songbooks and sheet music by their artists.\n\nTraditionally, music publishing royalties are split seventy/thirty, with thirty percent going to the publisher (as payment for their services) and the rest going to the songwriter or songwriters. Other arrangements have been made in the past, and continue to be; some better for the writers, some better for the publishers. Occasionally a recording artist will ask for a co-writer's credit on a song (thus sharing in both the artist and publishing royalties) in exchange for selecting it to perform, particularly if the writer is not well known. Sometimes an artist's manager or producer will expect a co-credit or share of the publishing (as with Norman Petty and Phil Spector ), and occasionally a publisher will insist on writer's credit (as Morris Levy did with several of his acts); these practices are listed in ascending order of scrupulousness , as regarded by the music industry.\n\nThe most unscrupulous type of music publisher is the song shark, who does little if any real \"legwork\" or promotion on behalf of songwriters. Song sharks make their profit not on royalties from sales, but by charging inexperienced writers for \"services\" (some real, such as demo recording or musical arranging , some fictional, such as \"audition\" or \"review\" fees) a legitimate publisher would provide without cost to the writer, as part of their job. By comparison, a bona fide publisher who charges admission to a workshop for writers, where songs may be auditioned or reviewed, is not wrong to do so.\n\nRock-n-roll pioneer Buddy Holly split with longtime manager Petty over publishing matters in late 1958, as did the Buckinghams with producer James William Guercio almost a decade later. John Fogerty of Creedence Clearwater Revival (CCR) was sued by his former publisher Saul Zaentz (who had also served as his manager) over a later Fogerty song that sounded slightly like a CCR song Zaentz published. Fogerty won in court.\n\nSeveral bands and artists own (or later purchase) their own publishing, and start their own companies, with or without help from an outside agent. The sale or loss of publishing ownership can be devastating to a given artist or writer, financially and emotionally. R&B legend Little Richard was largely cheated out of his music publishing and copyrights, as were many performers. Brian Wilson and Mike Love of The Beach Boys were crushed to learn that Murry Wilson (father to three of the Beach Boys, Love's uncle, and the band's music publisher) had sold their company Sea of Tunes to A&M Records during 1969 for a fraction of what it was worth – or earned in the following years.\n\nA large factor in the Beatles' breakup was when their publisher Dick James sold his share of Northern Songs , the company they'd formed with him in 1963 (then taken public in 1967, with shares trading on the London Stock Exchange ), to Britain's Associated TeleVision (ATV) in 1969. Neither the Beatles nor managers Lee Eastman and Allen Klein were able to prevent ATV from becoming majority stockholders in Northern Songs, whose assets included virtually all the group's song copyrights. Losing control of the company, John Lennon and Paul McCartney elected to sell their share of Northern Songs (and thus their own copyrights), while retaining their writer's royalties. ( George Harrison and Ringo Starr retained minority holdings in the company.)",
  "Open government is the governing doctrine which maintains that citizens have the right to access the documents and proceedings of the government to allow for effective public oversight. In its broadest construction, it opposes reason of state and other considerations which have tended to legitimize extensive state secrecy . The origins of open-government arguments can be dated to the time of the European Age of Enlightenment , when philosophers debated the proper construction of a then nascent democratic society . It is also increasingly being associated with the concept of democratic reform. The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 16 for example advocates for public access to information as a criterion for ensuring accountable and inclusive institutions. \n\nThe concept of open government is broad in scope but is most often connected to ideas of government transparency, participation and accountability. Transparency is defined as the visibility and inferability of information, accountability as answerability and enforceability, and participation is often graded along the \"ladder of citizen participation.\" Harlan Yu and David G. Robinson specify the distinction between open data and open government in their paper \"The New Ambiguity of \"Open Government\". They define open government in terms of service delivery and public accountability. They argue that technology can be used to facilitate disclosure of information, but that the use of open data technologies does not necessarily equate accountability. \n\nThe Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) approaches open government through the following categories: whole of government coordination, civic engagement and access to information, budget transparency, integrity and the fight against corruption, use of technology, and local development. \n\nThe term 'open government' originated in the United States after World War II. Wallace Parks, who served on a subcommittee on Government Information created by the U.S. Congress, introduce the term in his 1957 article \"The Open Government Principle: Applying the Right to Know under the Constitution\". After this and after the passing of the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) in 1966, federal courts began using the term as a synonym for government transparency. \n\nAlthough this was the first time that 'open government' was introduced the concept of transparency and accountability in government can be traced back to Ancient Greece in fifth century B.C.E. Athens where different legal institutions regulated the behavior of officials and offered a path for citizens to express their grievances towards them. One such institution, the euthyna, held officials to a standard of \"straightness\" and enforced that they give an account in front of an Assembly of citizens about everything that they did that year. \n\nIn more recent history, the idea that government should be open to public scrutiny and susceptible to public opinion dates back to the time of the Enlightenment , when many philosophes made an attack on absolutist doctrines of state secrecy. The passage of formal legislature can also be traced to this time with Sweden , (which then included Finland as a Swedish-governed territory) where free press legislation was enacted as part of its constitution ( Freedom of the Press Act, 1766). \n\nInfluenced by Enlightenment thought, the revolutions in United States (1776) and France (1789), enshrined provisions and requirements for public budgetary accounting and freedom of the press in constitutional articles. In the nineteenth century, attempts by Metternichean statesmen to row back on these measures were vigorously opposed by a number of eminent liberal politicians and writers, including Jeremy Bentham , John Stuart Mill and John Dalberg-Acton, 1st Baron Acton .\n\nOpen government is widely seen to be a key hallmark of contemporary democratic practice and is often linked to the passing of freedom of information legislation. Scandinavian countries claim to have adopted the first freedom of information legislation [ citation needed ] , dating the origins of its modern provisions to the eighteenth century [ citation needed ] and Finland continuing the presumption of openness after gaining independence in 1917, passing its Act on Publicity of Official Documents in 1951 (superseded by new legislation in 1999).\n\nAn emergent development also involves the increasing integration of software and mechanisms that allow citizens to become more directly involved in governance, particularly in the area of legislation. Some refer to this phenomenon as e-participation , which has been described as \"the use of information and communication technologies to broaden and deepen political participation by enabling citizens to connect with one another and with their elected representatives\". \n\nMorocco's new constitution of 2011, outlined several goals the government wishes to achieve in order to guarantee the citizens right to information. The world has been offering support to the government in order to enact these reforms through the Transparency and Accountability Development Policy Loan (DPL). This loan is part of a joint larger program between the European Union and the African Development Bank to offer financial and technical support to governments attempting to implement reforms. \n\nAs of 2010, section 35 of Kenya's constitution ensures citizens' rights to government information. The article states \"35.(1) Every citizen has the right of access to — (a) information held by the State; and (b) information held by another person and required for the exercise or protection of any right or fundamental freedom ... (3) The State shall publish and publicize any important information affecting the nation.\" Important government data is now freely available through the Kenya Open Data Initiative. \n\nTaiwan started its e-government program in 1998 and since then has had a series of laws and executive orders to enforce open government policies. The Freedom of Government Information Law of 2005, stated that all government information must be made public. Such information includes budgets, administrative plans, communication of government agencies, subsidies. Since then it released its open data platform, data.gov.tw . The Sunflower Movement of 2014, emphasized the value that Taiwanese citizens place on openness and transparency. A white paper published by the National Development Council with policy goals for 2020 explores ways to increase citizen participation and use open data for further government transparency. \n\nThe Philippines passed the Freedom of Information Order in 2016, outlining guidelines to practice government transparency and full public disclosure. In accordance with its General Appropriations Act of 2012, the Philippine government requires government agencies to display a \"transparency seal\" on their websites, which contains information about the agency's functions, annual reports, officials, budgets, and projects. \n\nThe Right to Information (RTI) movement in India, created the RTI law in 2005 after environmental movements demanded the release of information regarding environmental deterioration due to industrialization. Another catalyst for the RTI law and other similar laws in southeast Asia, may have been due to multilateral agencies offering aid and loans in exchange for more transparency or \"democratic\" policies. \n\nIn October 2023, Iranian government publicly opposed measure \"tritary branches of judiciary, executive, legislative transparency program\". The transparency law never passes after nine months as judiciary and state did not consent. The government has the Iranfoia website for requests. \n\nIn the Netherlands, large social unrest and the growing influence of televisions in the 1960s led to a push for more government openness. Access to information legislation was passed in 1980; since then, further emphasis has been placed on measuring the performance of government agencies. \n\nTransparency as a legal principle underpins European Union law , for example in regard to the quality of the drafting of legislation, and as a principle to be exercised within government procurement procedures. European law academics argued in 2007 that a \"new legal principle\", transparency, might be emerging \"in gestation\" within EU law. \n\nThe government of the Netherlands adopted an Open Government in Action ( Open overheid in actie ) Plan for 2016–2017, which outlines nine concrete commitments to the open government standards set by the OECD. \n\nSince 2018, in Wales , the Welsh Government has funded the training of Wikipedia skills in secondary schools, as part of the Welsh Baccalaureate and uses an open licence on all published videos and other content.\n\nIn 2009, President Obama released a memorandum on transparency and open government and started the Open Government Initiative . In his memorandum put forward his administration's goal to strengthen democracy through a transparent, participatory and collaborative government. The initiative has goals of a transparent and collaborative government, in which to end secrecy in Washington, while improving effectiveness through increased communication between citizens and government officials. Movements for government transparency in recent United States history started in the 1950s after World War II because federal departments and agencies had started limiting information availability as a reaction to global hostilities during the war and due to fear of Cold War spies. Agencies were given the right to deny access to information \"for good cause found\" or \"in the public interest\". These policies made it difficult for congressional committees to get access to records and documents, which then led to explorations of possible legislative solutions. \n\nSince the early 2000s, transparency has been an important part of Latin America's efforts to professionalize government and fight corruption. All countries in the region have enacted freedom of information laws, beginning with Mexico, Peru, and Panama in 2002. Chile's Anti-Corruption and Probity Agenda and State Modernization Agenda. In 2008, Chile passed the Transparency Law has led to further open government reforms. Chile published its open government action plan for 2016–18 as part of its membership of the Open Government Partnership (OGP). \n\nTransparency has been described as the visibility and inferability of information, defined by complete and findable information, which leads to accurate conclusions. It has two principal manifestations, monitoring transparency and consultation or collaboration transparency. It holds importance in more modern discussions because of its presence in new public management. For transparency to work, the idea goes beyond government involvement and must include public trust. Transparency in government has three main aspects. First, budgetary information must be viewable by the public. Second, there must be an effective way to make and enforce laws. Last, non-government organizations and a form of independent media must be at the center for public use. With transparency, there are also factors for data disclosure, such as timeliness, quality, and access and visibility. Data disclosure is important for transparency because it increases public understanding of governmental practices and is the goal of open government. However, there are arguments for both sides of transparency that must be considered.\n\nTransparency in government is often credited with generating government accountability , which supporters argue leads to reduction in government corruption , bribery and other malfeasance . This is mentioned later and discussed as accountability with transparency. Some commentators contend that an open, transparent government allows for the dissemination of information, which in turn helps produce greater knowledge and societal progress. Organizations supporting transparency policies such as the OECD and the Open Government Partnership claim that open government reforms can also lead to increased trust in government, although there is mixed evidence to support these claims, with increased transparency sometimes leading to reduced trust in government. \n\nPublic opinion can also be shifted when people have access to see the result of a certain policy. The United States government has at times forbid journalists to publish photographs of soldiers' coffins, an apparent attempt to manage emotional reactions that might heighten public criticism of ongoing wars; nonetheless, many believe that emotionally charged images can be valuable information. Similarly, some opponents of the death penalty have argued that executions should be televised so the public can \"see what is being done in their name and with their tax dollars.\" \n\nGovernment transparency is beneficial for efficient democracy, as information helps citizens form meaningful conclusions about upcoming legislation and vote for them in the next election. According to the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace , greater citizen participation in government is linked to government transparency. \n\nAdvocates of open government often argue that civil society , rather than government legislation , offers the best route to more transparent administration. They point to the role of whistleblowers reporting from inside the government bureaucracy (individuals like Daniel Ellsberg or Paul van Buitenen ). They argue that an independent and inquiring press, printed or electronic, is often a stronger guarantor of transparency than legislative checks and balances. \n\nThe contemporary doctrine of open government finds its strongest advocates in non-governmental organizations keen to counter what they see as the inherent tendency of government to lapse, whenever possible, into secrecy. Prominent among these NGOs are bodies like Transparency International or the Open Society Institute . They argue that standards of openness are vital to the ongoing prosperity and development of democratic societies.\n\nGovernment indecision, poor performance and gridlock are among the risks of government transparency, according to some critics. Political commentator David Frum wrote in 2014 that, \"instead of yielding more accountability, however, these reforms [transparency reforms] have yielded more lobbying, more expense, more delay, and more indecision.\" Jason Grumet argues that government officials cannot properly deliberate, collaborate and compromise when everything they are doing is being watched. A randomized controlled trial conducted with 463 delegates of the National Assembly of Vietnam showed that increased transparency of the legislative proceedings, such as debates and query transcripts, curtailed delegates activity in the query sessions, avoiding taking part in activities that could embarrass leaders of the Vietnamese regime. \n\nPrivacy is another concern. Citizens may incur \"adverse consequences, retribution or negative repercussions\" from information provided by governments. Teresa Scassa, a law professor at the University of Ottawa, outlined three main possible privacy challenges in a 2014 article. First is the difficulty of balancing further transparency of government, while also protecting the privacy of personal information, or information about identifiable individuals that is in the hands of the government. Second is dealing with distinctions between data protection regulations between private and public sector actors because governments may access information collected by private companies which are not controlled by as stringent laws. Third is the release of \"Big data\", which may appear anonymized can be reconnected to specific individuals using sophisticated algorithms. \n\nIntelligence gathering, especially to identify violent threats (whether domestic or foreign), must often be done clandestinely. Frum wrote in 2014 that \"the very same imperatives that drive states to collect information also require them to deny doing so. These denials matter even when they are not believed.\" \n\nMoral certitude undergirds much transparency advocacy, but a number of scholars question whether it is possible for us to have that certitude. They have also highlighted how transparency can support certain neoliberal imperatives. \n\nConcerns have also been raised in the election administration community about the use of excessive Freedom of Information Act requests as a tactic of election deniers to disrupt the functioning of local and county election offices. Often unreasonably broad, repetitive, or based on misinformation, the high volume of requests has led to what a Colorado official said amounts to \"a denial-of-service attack on local government.\" Local election officials in Florida and Michigan have reported spending 25-70% of staff time in recent years on processing public records requests. \n\nA review of recent state laws by the Center for Election Innovation & Research found at least 13 states that have sought to protect election staff from the abuse of FOIA requests in several ways, such as creating publicly accessible databases that do not require staff assistance and giving election staff the authority to deny unreasonable or clearly frivolous requests. \n\nAccountability focuses on promoting transparency and allowing the public to understand the actions of their government. Public officials are expected to share details about how public resources are used and what their objectives are. Accountability in open government reduces corruption and increases transparency. However, it is important to note that there is transparency with and without accountability in open government. Transparency without accountability is often more difficult to monitor and there is less responsibility needed from the government. Transparency with accountability has proven to be more effective as a trustworthy relationship can be built between government agencies and people governed by them. The argument with or without transparency was mentioned previously and highlights major issues such as losing governmental trust or privacy issues with accountability. Some governments have created portals in order to allow people to see critical data and improve accountability and transparency. Not all data released on these portals is relevant and easily accessible meaning transparency is not always easily attainable. For example, Given the criteria for valuable information, governments should look for quality, completeness, timeliness, and usability when releasing important information that shows transparency and supports accountability. \n\nAccountability in open government establishes the presence of transparency within governments. Accountability and transparency work to promote open government in democracies. Through organizations such as the Open Government Partnership (OGP) within the United States, which was established by the U.S. Department of State , there have been efforts to enhance democracies through both accountability and transparency. These efforts reach beyond the scope of North America and even into some Latin American and Asian countries. Promoting open government in Latin American countries has increased public trust and reduced corruption. Latin American countries were among those included in the OGP plan promoted by the United States in the Obama Administration. Additionally, in Asia, there has been a push towards right to information (RTI) to help build accountability. However, these measures in countries have shown open government measures are not one size fits all. They can fail and have to be tweaked for each region and there must be awareness from the public to demand accountability to ensure they receive it from the government. \n\nMost of the relationship helps strengthen transparency in governments through the means of accountability. Transparency acts as the vision for open government, allowing the public to have quality access to government records and data. This open access forces governments to be more accountable as they cannot hide corruption with transparency. There can be transparency without accountability, which allows the government to choose which data is of significant value to be released to the public. This does not solve the lack of accountability and highlights the necessity of transparency with accountability. With both transparency and accountability, there must be regulations in place to make agencies justify why they are relinquishing certain information along with strict enforcement to ensure all transparency measures are fulfilled. \n\nGovernments and organizations are using new technologies as a tool for increased transparency. Examples include use of open data platforms to publish information online and the theory of open source governance .\n\nOpen government data (OGD), a term which refers specifically to the public publishing of government datasets, is often made available through online platforms such as data.gov.uk or www.data.gov. Proponents of OGD argue that easily accessible data pertaining to governmental institutions allows for further citizen engagement within political institutions. OGD principles require that data is complete, primary, timely, accessible, machine processable, non-discriminatory, non-proprietary, and license free. \n\nPublic and private sector platforms provide an avenue for citizens to engage while offering access to transparent information that citizens have come to expect. Numerous organizations have worked to consolidate resources for citizens to access government (local, state and federal) budget spending, stimulus spending, lobbyist spending, legislative tracking, and more. ",
  "Dame Darcey Andrea Bussell , DBE (born Marnie Mercedes Darcey Pemberton Crittle ; 27 April 1969) is a retired English ballerina and a former judge on the BBC television dance contest Strictly Come Dancing .\n\nTrained at the Arts Educational School and the Royal Ballet School , Bussell began her professional career at Sadlers Wells Royal Ballet . In 1989, at the age of 20, she moved to The Royal Ballet , where she became the youngest-ever principal dancer . \n\nBussell remained with The Royal Ballet for her entire career, more than two decades. She however performed as a guest artist with many companies including the New York City Ballet , La Scala Theatre Ballet , the Kirov Ballet , Hamburg Ballet and the Australian Ballet . She retired from ballet in 2007.\n\nBussell was born Marnie Crittle in London to Andrea Williams, an English model and actress, and John Crittle an Australian businessman. \n\nHer parents divorced when she was three years old, and her mother remarried Australian dentist Philip Bussell, who became her adoptive father. The family spent some time in Australia, where Bussell attended school before they returned to London for Bussell to be educated at Fox Primary School in Kensington. She was diagnosed with dyslexia at the age of nine. At school she excelled at physical activity, and this influenced her career path. \n\nBussell studied \"all forms of stagecraft\" at the Arts Educational School . In 1982, at the age of 13, she joined the Royal Ballet Lower School , based at White Lodge, Richmond Park . At 16, she progressed to the Royal Ballet Upper School in Baron's Court, before joining the Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet in 1987. While studying at the Royal Ballet School, she appeared in a number of school productions, including performances at Covent Garden . \n\nIn 1988, while still at school, Bussell was given in a leading role by choreographer Kenneth MacMillan , in his ballet The Prince of the Pagodas , which led to her moving to the Royal Ballet . A year later in 1989, on the opening night of the show, she was promoted to principal dancer , and at just 20 years old, was the youngest ever in the history of the company. \n\nBussell performed all the major classical roles numerous times throughout her career, including Masha in Winter Dreams and Princess Rose in The Prince of the Pagodas , both choreographed by MacMillan, as well as Princess Aurora in The Sleeping Beauty , Odette/Odile in Swan Lake , Nikiya and Gamzatti in La Bayadère , the Sugar Plum Fairy in The Nutcracker , Manon in L'histoire de Manon , and Giselle in Giselle . \n\nIn total, she performed more than 80 different roles and 17 roles were created for her. In Sleeping Beauty alone, she performed Aurora in four different productions, one of which was Sir Anthony Dowell 's production which she opened at the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C. in front of President Clinton . She made several guest appearances with the New York City Ballet , starting in June 1993, with a performance of the pas de deux from Agon . \n\nShe retired from ballet on 8 June 2007 with a performance of MacMillan's Song of the Earth (music Gustav Mahler : Das Lied von der Erde ). It was performed at the Royal Opera House in London, and broadcast live on BBC Two . Bussell is widely regarded as one of the finest British ballerinas. \n\nIn 2012 Bussell was a member of the jury at the Prix de Lausanne ballet competition. Same year she participated in the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony , leading a troupe of 200 ballerinas and 4 male dancers from the Royal Ballet . The performance was known as \"the Spirit of the Flame\" and preceded the official dousing of the Olympic flame . \n\nBussell performed the role of the mayor in the 2021 ballet film, Coppelia , a modern adaptation of the E.T.A. Hoffmann story combining live dance with animation. \n\nBussell was announced as the first female chair of the Board of Trustees of Plymouth Theatre Royal in March 2023. She served as a president of the jury at the Prix de Lausanne ballet competition in 2024.\n\nIn October 2008 HarperCollins Children's Books released six short books in a new children's series called Magic Ballerina . Bussell had initiated the idea and storyline, and the books were written using a series of ghost writers. They feature a girl named Delphie who joins a ballet school and discovers her shoes are magical. Within three years at least 23 Magic Ballerina stories were published, all featuring girls who own magic sparkly red ballet shoes. At least the first two were illustrated by Katie May. \n\nShe co-wrote The Young Dancer with the Royal Ballet School and wrote an introduction to the book The Illustrated Book of Ballet by Barbara Newman, which showcases five of the ballets in which she starred. An autobiographical picture book of her ballet career, titled Darcey Bussell , was released in 2012. followed by Darcey Bussell: Evolved in 2018.\n\nA South Bank Show documentary on Bussell and her fellow principal Viviana Durante was broadcast in October 1992. In 1994 she played her first acting part, playing Olga Khokhlova opposite Brian Cox's Pablo Picasso in Yo Picasso . Bussell guest starred as herself in the popular BBC1 comedy The Vicar of Dibley in 1998. In the episode, she aids Geraldine in a fundraiser and the two perform a pas de deux called \"The Mirror\". \n\nIn 2004 Bussell was the subject of a documentary titled Britain's Ballerina . Bussell teamed up with Katherine Jenkins to stage a song and dance production titled Viva la Diva , to pay tribute to the stars who inspired them, who include Madonna and Judy Garland . Bussell and Jenkins performed a segment of Viva la Diva before the Queen at the 79th Royal Variety Performance which was televised on 9 December 2007. Bussell joined the BBC's Strictly Come Dancing judging panel as a fifth judge in the final stages of the 2009 series. On the semi-final show of the competition she danced a jive with the professional dancer Ian Waite . \n\nIn December 2011 Bussell collaborated with choreographer Kim Gavin to make Darcey dances Hollywood , a BBC Two television documentary in which she recreated some of Hollywood's famous dance routines—including some by Gene Kelly and Fred Astaire & Ginger Rogers —from films such as Singin' In The Rain and Top Hat (\"Cheek to Cheek\").\n\nIn 2012 Bussell returned to the Strictly Come Dancing judging panel for the 2012 series as a permanent judge and replacement for Alesha Dixon . \n\nOn 12 August 2012 Bussell performed at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics , descending from the roof of the Olympic stadium as the 'Spirit of the Flame' and leading a troupe of 200 ballerinas. \n\nIn December 2013 Bussell presented a BBC Two documentary titled Darcey's Ballet Heroines . In December 2014 she presented a BBC One documentary on Audrey Hepburn , titled Darcey Bussell: Looking for Audrey . In May 2015, Bussell was co-presenter and dance expert for the Grand Final of the inaugural BBC Young Dancer competition, which was aired live on BBC Two . \n\nIn December 2015 Bussell presented an hour-long documentary on BBC Two, Darcey's Ballet Heroes , focussing on Vaslav Nijinsky , Rudolf Nureyev , and other male professionals ballet dancers. In December 2016, she presented a BBC One documentary on Margot Fonteyn , titled Darcey Bussell: Looking for Margot . In December 2017, she presented a BBC One documentary on Fred Astaire, titled Darcey Bussell: Looking for Fred . In December 2018, she presented a BBC Two documentary on the mental health benefits of dance, titled Darcey Bussell: Dancing to Happiness . \n\nOn 10 April 2019 Bussell announced that she had decided to step down as judge from Strictly Come Dancing . She said: \"It has been a complete privilege for me to be part of Strictly , working with such a talented team. I have enjoyed every minute of my time and will miss everyone from my fellow judges, the presenters, the dancers, the musicians, the entire back stage team, and especially the viewers of the show, who have been so supportive.\" \n\nBussell presented Darcey Bussell's Wild Coasts of Scotland , a four-part travel series which aired on More4 from 8 February to 1 March 2021. \n\nOn 19 July 2022, the four-part series Darcey Bussell's Royal Roadtrip , presented by Bussell, will premiere on More4 . \n\nIn 1994, a full-length portrait of her was unveiled by the artist Allen Jones RA, commissioned by The National Portrait Gallery , London. \n\nBussell was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 1995 New Year Honours for services to ballet, Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2006 Birthday Honours , and Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2018 New Year Honours for services to dance. \n\nIn 2006, at the Chelsea Flower Show , David Austin Roses launched a new crimson rose called 'Darcey Bussell'. \n\nIn 2019, Megabus named one of their new fleet of coaches 'Darcey Bussell'. \n\nBussell is the \"godmother\" of MS Azura , a 115,000 ton cruise liner of the P&O Cruises fleet. When the ship was officially launched in April 2010, Bussell performed the traditional ceremony of breaking a bottle of champagne to name the ship. She also staged a dance performance with students from the Royal Ballet School . \n\nIn 2006 Bussell became a gold medal recipient from the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts . She is a recipient of the Carl Alan Award for contributions to dance. \n\nIn December 1990 she was voted Dancer of the Year by the readers of Dance and Dancers magazine. [ citation needed ] In February 1991 she was presented with the Variety Club of Great Britain's Sir James Garreras Award for the most promising newcomer of 1990 and one week later with the London Evening Standard Ballet Award for 1990. In April 1991 she was selected as the joint winner of the Cosmopolitan Achievement Award in the Performing Arts category. \n\nOn 18 July 2009 Bussell received an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford . During the ceremony the university's public orator noted that she \"adds to technical mastery, charm and imagination, in such a way that she seems to reveal the grace of her personality as well as the grace of movement… Moreover, she wants those who are perhaps put off by the grand portals of the Royal Opera House to enjoy the pleasures that ballet affords.\" \n\nIn 2017 Bussell received an honorary doctorate from the Royal Conservatoire in Glasgow, Scotland. \n\nIn June 2018 Bussell received an honorary Fellowship from Arts University Bournemouth alongside costume designer Jenny Beavan OBE, graphic designer Margaret Calvert OBE and director and screenwriter Edgar Wright . Bussell, had previously visited the university as a guest lecturer. \n\nSince 2012 Bussell has been the president of the Royal Academy of Dance . \n\nBussell has been campaign president of the Birmingham Royal Ballet's fund raising campaign since 2012. She is an ambassador for the giving programme of the New Zealand School of Dance, and is on the board of the Margot Fonteyn Foundation. [ citation needed ] She is the international patron of the Sydney Dance Company. \n\nShe is a patron of the medical charities Borne, Sight for All and the Henry Spink Foundation. \n\nIn 1997 Bussell married Australian banker Angus Forbes, in Cherwell , Oxfordshire. \n\nOriginally, the couple lived in Kensington , moving to Sydney , Australia in 2008 and returning to London in July 2012. As of 2021, they live in Wimbledon . ",
  "A stand-your-ground law , sometimes called a \" line in the sand \" or \"no duty to retreat\" law , provides that people may use deadly force when they reasonably believe it to be necessary to defend against certain violent crimes ( right of self-defense ). Under such a law, people have no duty to retreat before using deadly force in self-defense , so long as they are in a place where they are lawfully present. The exact details vary by jurisdiction.\n\nThe alternative to stand your ground is \"duty to retreat\". In jurisdictions that implement a duty to retreat, even a person who is unlawfully attacked (or who is defending someone who is unlawfully attacked) may not use deadly force if it is possible to instead avoid the danger with complete safety by retreating.\n\nEven areas that impose a duty to retreat generally follow the \" castle doctrine \", under which people have no duty to retreat when they are attacked in their homes, or (in some places) in their vehicles or workplaces. The castle doctrine and \"stand-your-ground\" laws provide legal defenses to persons who have been charged with various use-of-force crimes against persons, such as murder, manslaughter, aggravated assault, and illegal discharge or brandishing of weapons, as well as attempts to commit such crimes. \n\nWhether a jurisdiction follows stand-your-ground or duty-to-retreat is just one element of its self-defense laws. Different jurisdictions allow deadly force against different crimes. All American states allow it against prior deadly force, great bodily injury , and likely kidnapping or rape ; some also allow it against threat of robbery and burglary .\n\nA 2020 RAND Corporation review of existing research concluded: \"There is supportive evidence that stand-your-ground laws are associated with increases in firearm homicides and moderate evidence that they increase the total number of homicides.\" \n\nIn Canada, there is no duty to retreat under the law. Canada's laws regarding self-defense are similar in nature to those of England, as they centre around the acts committed, and whether or not those acts are considered reasonable in the circumstances. Generally where retreat is available in the circumstances, the decision to stand your ground is more likely to be unreasonable. The sections of the Canadian criminal code that deal with self-defense or defense of property are sections 34 and 35, respectively. These sections were updated in 2012 to clarify the code, and to help legal professionals apply the law in accordance with the values Canadians hold to be acceptable.\n\nDefence — use of threat or force\n\n34 (1) A person is not guilty of an offence if\n\n(a) they believe on reasonable grounds that force is being used against them or another person or that a threat of force is being made against them or another person;\n(b) the act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of defending or protecting themselves or the other person from that use or threat of force; and\n(c) the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances.\n[omitted (2)]\n\nNo defence\n\n(3) Subsection (1) does not apply if the force is used or threatened by another person for the purpose of doing something that they are required or authorized by law to do in the administration or enforcement of the law, unless the person who commits the act that constitutes the offence believes on reasonable grounds that the other person is acting unlawfully.\n\nR.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 34; 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F); 2012, c. 9, s. 2.\n\n34\n\n[omitted (1)]\n\nFactors (2) In determining whether the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances, the court shall consider the relevant circumstances of the person, the other parties and the act, including, but not limited to, the following factors:\n\n(a) the nature of the force or threat;\n(b) the extent to which the use of force was imminent and whether there were other means available to respond to the potential use of force;\n(c) the person’s role in the incident;\n(d) whether any party to the incident used or threatened to use a weapon;\n(e) the size, age, gender and physical capabilities of the parties to the incident;\n(f) the nature, duration and history of any relationship between the parties to the incident, including any prior use or threat of force and the nature of that force or threat;\n(f.1) any history of interaction or communication between the parties to the incident;\n(g) the nature and proportionality of the person’s response to the use or threat of force; and\n(h) whether the act committed was in response to a use or threat of force that the person knew was lawful.\n[omitted (3)]\n\nR.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 34; 1992, c. 1, s. 60(F); 2012, c. 9, s. 2.\n\nDefence — property\n\n35 (1) A person is not guilty of an offence if\n\n(a) they either believe on reasonable grounds that they are in peaceable possession of property or are acting under the authority of, or lawfully assisting, a person whom they believe on reasonable grounds is in peaceable possession of property;\n(b) they believe on reasonable grounds that another person\n(i) is about to enter, is entering or has entered the property without being entitled by law to do so,\n(ii) is about to take the property, is doing so or has just done so, or\n(iii) is about to damage or destroy the property, or make it inoperative, or is doing so;\n(c) the act that constitutes the offence is committed for the purpose of\n(i) preventing the other person from entering the property, or removing that person from the property, or\n(ii) preventing the other person from taking, damaging or destroying the property or from making it inoperative, or retaking the property from that person; and\n(d) the act committed is reasonable in the circumstances.\n\nNo defence (2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the person who believes on reasonable grounds that they are, or who is believed on reasonable grounds to be, in peaceable possession of the property does not have a claim of right to it and the other person is entitled to its possession by law.\n\nNo defence (3) Subsection (1) does not apply if the other person is doing something that they are required or authorized by law to do in the administration or enforcement of the law, unless the person who commits the act that constitutes the offence believes on reasonable grounds that the other person is acting unlawfully.\nR.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 35; 2012, c. 9, s. 2.\n\nA great deal of case law has emerged from different provincial superior courts regarding the interpretation of the elements of self-defense per ss. 34-35 of the Criminal Code . In Ontario , jurors are not permitted \"...to consider whether an accused could have retreated from his or her own home in the face of an attack (or threatened attack) by an assailant in assessing the elements of self-defense.” In British Columbia , the leading case law of which predates the 2012 ss. 34-35 amendments, courts will permit juries to consider available lines of retreat in deciding whether an accused had no other option than to defend himself. However, the option of retreat is not considered a categorical exclusion from self-defense. \n\nThe province of Alberta is unique among Canadian jurisdictions in affording civil immunity to occupiers who employ force, including lethal force, in defense of homes and other premises. In 2019, the Alberta legislature passed the Trespass Statutes (Protecting Law-Abiding Property Owners) Amendment Act, 2019 , in response to rising rural crime, public concern with police inaction and several high-profile self-defense shootings the previous year. Especially influential was the case of Edouard Maurice, who wounded a trespasser and was served with a lawsuit after having criminal charges against him dropped. \n\nThe new Act amended the Occupiers Liability Act, 2000 and added the following sections:\n\n(2) Where a trespasser is not a criminal trespasser, an occupier is not liable to the trespasser for damages for death of or injury to the trespasser unless the death or injury results from the occupier’s wilful or reckless conduct.\n\n(3) Where a trespasser is a criminal trespasser, no action lies against the occupier for damages for death of or injury to the trespasser unless the death or injury is caused by conduct of the occupier that\n\n(a) is wilful and grossly disproportionate in the circumstances, and\n\n(b) results in the occupier being convicted of an offence under the Criminal Code (Canada) that is prosecuted by indictment .\n\n(4) For the purposes of subsections (2) and (3), a trespasser is a criminal trespasser if the occupier has reasonable grounds to believe that the trespasser is committing or is about to commit an offence under the Criminal Code (Canada).\n\n(5) For the purposes of subsection (3), an occupier is deemed not to be convicted of an offence until the period limited by law for the commencement of an appeal from the conviction has elapsed or the appeal taken from the conviction has concluded or been abandoned.\n\nCzech law abandoned the duty to retreat in 1852. Since then, the successive recodifications of criminal law lacked any such requirement. In order for a defense to be judged as legitimate, it may not be \"manifestly disproportionate to the manner of the attack\". \n\nThe common law jurisdiction of England and Wales has a stand-your-ground law rooted in the common law defense of using reasonable force in self-defense.\n\nIn English common law there is no duty to retreat before a person may use reasonable force against an attacker, nor need a person wait to be attacked before using such force, but one who chooses not to retreat, when retreat would be a safe and easy option, might find it harder to justify his use of force as 'reasonable'. \n\nAny force used must be reasonable in the circumstances as the person honestly perceived them to be, after making allowance for the fact that some degree of excess force might still be reasonable in the heat of the moment. \n\nIn the home, the householder is protected by an additional piece of legislation in which it is specified that force used against an intruder is not to be regarded as reasonable if it is 'grossly disproportionate ' (as distinct from merely ' disproportionate ' force, which can still be reasonable).\n\nLike England and Wales, France has a stand-your-ground law rooted in the defense of using reasonable force in self-defense.\n\nUnder article 122-5 of French Criminal Code, a person who, faced with an unjustified attack on himself or another, at the same time performs an act required by the need for self-defense of himself or another, is not criminally responsible, unless there is a disproportion between the means of defense used and the seriousness of the attack. There is no duty to retreat before a person may use reasonable force against an attacker, nor need a person wait to be attacked before using such force, but one who chooses not to retreat, when retreat would be a safe and easy option, might find it harder to justify his use of force by the need for self-defense.\n\nAny force used must be reasonable in the circumstances as the person honestly perceived them to be, after making allowance for the fact that some degree of excess force might still be reasonable in the heat of the moment. The person who performs the act is presumed to have acted in self-defense:\n1° when repelling, by night, the entry by break-in, violence or trickery in an inhabited place;\n2° when defending himself against the authors of robbery or looting executed with violence.\n\nGerman law permits self-defense against an unlawful attack. If there is no other possibility for defense, it is generally allowed to use even deadly force without a duty to retreat. However, there must not be an extreme imbalance (\" extremes Missverhältnis \") between the defended right and the chosen method of defense. In particular, in a case in which firearms are used, a warning shot must be given when defending a solely material asset. If the self-defense was excessive, its perpetrator is not to be punished if he or she exceeded on account of confusion, fear or terror. \n\nUnder the terms of the Criminal Law (Defence and the Dwelling) Act 2011 , property owners or residents are entitled to defend themselves with force, up to and including lethal force. Any individual who uses force against a trespasser is not guilty of an offense if he or she honestly believes they were there to commit a criminal act and a threat to life. However, there is a further provision which requires that the reaction to the intruder is such that another reasonable person in the same circumstances would likely employ it. This provision acts as a safeguard against grossly disproportionate use of force, while still allowing a person to use force in nearly all circumstances.\n\nThe law was introduced in response to DPP v. Padraig Nally .\n\nIn 2019, the Italian senate passed a \"legitimate defense\" bill, protecting the right to self-defense for private citizens of Italy. \n\nStand-your-ground law applies to any kind of threat by an attacker that endangers the victim's safety, health, or life. The victim has no obligation to retreat, as said in a statement by the Supreme Court of Poland on February 4, 1972: \"The assaulted person is under no obligation either to escape or hide from the assailant in a locked room, nor to endure the assault restricting his freedom, but has the right to repel the assault with all available means that are necessary to force the assailant to refrain from continuing his assault.\" \n\nSection 2a of the Polish Penal Code introduced in 2017 codifies a limited castle doctrine , by excluding punishment if the defendant used excessive force while protecting one's home unless \"exceeding the limits of necessary defense was gross\".\n\nIf the self-defense was excessive, its perpetrator is not to be punished if he or she exceeded on account of fear or rage justified by the circumstances of the attack. \n\nStand-your-ground laws are frequently labeled \"shoot first\" laws by opposition groups, including the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence . In Florida, self-defense claims tripled in the years following enactment. Opponents argue that Florida's law makes it potentially more difficult to prosecute cases against individuals who commit a crime and claim self-defense. Before passage of the law, Miami police chief John F. Timoney called the law unnecessary and dangerous in that \"[w]hether it's trick-or-treaters or kids playing in the yard of someone who doesn't want them there or some drunk guy stumbling into the wrong house, you're encouraging people to possibly use deadly physical force where it shouldn't be used.\" A counterargument is that implementing a duty-to-retreat places the safety of the criminal above a victim's own life. \n\nIn Florida, a task force created by former Democratic state Sen. Chris Smith of Fort Lauderdale found the law to be \"confusing\". Those discussing issues with the group included Buddy Jacobs, a lawyer representing the Florida Prosecuting Attorneys Association. Jacobs recommended the law's repeal, stating that modifying the law would not fix its problems. In a July 16, 2013 speech in the wake of the jury verdict acquitting George Zimmerman of charges stemming from the shooting death of Trayvon Martin , Attorney General Eric Holder criticized stand-your-ground laws as \"senselessly expand[ing] the concept of self-defense and sow[ing] dangerous conflict in our neighborhoods.\" \n\nIn 2014, Florida's legislature considered a bill that would allow people to show a gun or fire a warning shot during a confrontation without drawing a lengthy prison sentence. In 2017, there was a bill proposed in Florida's state legislature that would require the prosecution to prove that a defendant's use of self-defense was not valid. In 2018, the shooting of Markeis McGlockton led some civil rights activists and politicians to call for abolition of the statute. \n\nIn 2012, in response to the Trayvon Martin case , the Tampa Bay Times compiled a report on the application of stand your ground, and also created a database of cases where defendants sought to invoke the law. The database included many cases that were not legally stand your ground, such as when the defender was in the home or had no safe opportunity to flee, so care must be taken in its evaluation in regards to stand your ground law. Their report found no racial disparity in Florida cases in which defendants claiming self-defense under the law are prosecuted, with Caucasian subjects being charged and convicted at the same rate as African American subjects, and results of mixed-race cases were similar for both white victims of black attackers and black victims of white attackers. Victims of African American attackers overall were more successful at using the law than victims of Caucasian attackers, regardless of the victim's race claiming self-defense, but analysis showed that black attackers were also more likely to be armed and to be involved in committing a crime, such as burglary, when shot. \n\nA Texas A&M study found that when whites use the stand-your-ground defense against black attackers they are more successful than when blacks use the defense against white attackers. A paper from The Urban Institute which analysed FBI data found that in stand-your-ground states, the use of the defense by whites in the shooting of a black person is found to be justifiable 17 percent of the time, while the defense when used by blacks in the shooting of a white person is successful 1 percent of the time. In non-stand-your-ground states, the shooting of a black person by a white is found justified approximately 9 percent of the time, while the shooting of a white person by a black is found justified approximately 1 percent of the time. According to the Urban Institute, in Stand Your Ground states, white-on-black homicides are 354 percent more likely to be ruled justified than white-on-white homicides, even though they are more common by over 72 percent. The paper's author noted that the data used do not detail the circumstances of the shooting, which could be a source of the disparity. They also noted that the total number of shootings in the FBI dataset of black victims by whites was 25. A 2015 study found that cases with white victims are two times more likely to result in convictions under Florida's stand your ground law than cases with black victims, although the study did not exclude many cases that were not legally stand your ground under the law. \n\nA 2018 RAND Corporation review of existing research concluded that \"there is moderate evidence that stand-your-ground laws may increase homicide rates and limited evidence that the laws increase firearm homicides in particular.\" In 2019, RAND authors published an update, writing \"Since publication of RAND's report, at least four additional studies meeting RAND's standards of rigor have reinforced the finding that \"stand your ground\" laws increase homicides. None of them found that \"stand your ground\" laws deter violent crime. No rigorous study has yet determined whether \"stand your ground\" laws promote legitimate acts of self-defense. \n\nA 2017 study in the Journal of Human Resources found that Stand Your Ground laws led to an increase in homicides and hospitalizations related to firearm-inflicted injuries. The study estimated that at least 30 people died per month due to the laws. A 2013 study in the Journal of Human Resources found that Stand Your Ground laws in states across the U.S. \"do not deter burglary , robbery , or aggravated assault . In contrast, they lead to a statistically significant 8 percent net increase in the number of reported murders.\" A 2016 study in the Social Science Journal found that stand-your-ground laws were not associated with lower crime rates. A 2016 study in the Journal of the American Medical Association compared homicide rates in Florida following the passage of its \"stand your ground\" self-defense law to the rates in four control states, New Jersey, New York, Ohio and Virginia, which have no similar laws. It found that the law was associated with a 24.4% increase in homicide and a 31.6% increase in firearm-related homicide, but no change in rates of suicide or suicide by firearm, between 2005 and 2014. It noted that, \"[c]ircumstances unique to Florida may have contributed to our findings, including those that we could not identify,\" and \"[o]ur study examined the effect of the Florida law on homicide and homicide by firearm, not on crime and public safety\". The study was criticized by researcher and gun rights advocate John Lott , for studying only one state and focusing on a narrow definition of effectiveness. Studies conducted by Lott's Crime Prevention Research Center found that the loosening of restrictions on defensive gun use , including “stand your ground laws”, led to a decrease in crime overall. Self-defense law subject matter expert Andrew Branca was critical of the AMA study for not distinguishing between justifiable homicides and murder, and for relying solely on statutory laws while overlooking case law (i.e. Virginia) in determining the data set. The study's methodology was defended by Duke University professor Jeffrey Swanson for its use of other states as controls, saying \"[t]hey look at comparable trends in states that didn't pass the law and don't see the effect.\". \n\nIn a 2007 National District Attorneys Association symposium, numerous concerns were voiced that the law could increase crime. This included criminals using the law as a defense for their crimes, more people carrying guns, and that people would not feel safe if they felt that anyone could use deadly force in a conflict. The report also noted that the misinterpretation of clues could result in the use of deadly force when there was, in fact, no danger. The report specifically notes that racial and ethnic minorities could be at greater risk because of negative stereotypes. \n\nA 2012 study examined whether a prominent Stand Your Ground shooting, Joe Horn shooting controversy , in 2007, which brought public attention to Texas' stand-your-ground law impacted crime. The study found that subsequent to the shooting, burglaries decreased significantly in Houston , but not in Dallas , over a 20-month period. A 2015 study found that the adoption of Oklahoma's stand-your-ground law was associated with a decrease in residential burglaries, but also that the law had \"the unintended consequence of increasing the number of non-residential burglaries.\" \n\nFlorida's stand-your-ground law went into effect on October 1, 2005. Florida state representative Dennis Baxley , an author of the law, said that the violent crime rate has dropped since the enactment of the law, though he said there may be many reasons for the change. Others have argued that the law may lead to an increase in crime. Violent crime data for 1995 – 2015 has been published by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement . ",
  "The construction of the first World Trade Center complex in New York City was conceived as an urban renewal project to help revitalize Lower Manhattan spearheaded by David Rockefeller . The project was developed by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey . The idea for the World Trade Center arose after World War II as a way to supplement existing avenues of international commerce in the United States.\n\nThe World Trade Center was originally planned to be built on the east side of Lower Manhattan, but the New Jersey and New York state governments, which oversee the Port Authority, could not agree on this location. After extensive negotiations, the New Jersey and New York state governments agreed to support the World Trade Center project, which was built at the site of Radio Row in the Lower West Side of Manhattan , New York City. To make the agreement acceptable to New Jersey, the Port Authority agreed to take over the bankrupt Hudson & Manhattan Railroad, which brought commuters from New Jersey to the Lower Manhattan site and, upon the Port Authority's takeover of the railroad, was renamed PATH .\n\nThe Port Authority hired architect Minoru Yamasaki , who came up with the specific idea for twin towers. The towers were designed as framed tube structures , which provided tenants with open floor plans, uninterrupted by columns or walls. This was accomplished using numerous closely spaced perimeter columns to provide much of the strength to the structure, along with gravity load shared with the core columns. The elevator system, which made use of sky lobbies and a system of express and local elevators, allowed substantial floor space to be freed up for use as office space by making the structural core smaller. The design and construction of the World Trade Center, most centrally its twin towers, involved many other innovative techniques, such as the slurry wall for digging the foundation , and wind tunnel experiments.\n\nConstruction of the World Trade Center's North Tower began in August 1968, and the South Tower in 1969. Extensive use of prefabricated components helped to speed up the construction process. The first tenants moved into the North Tower in December 1970 and into the South Tower in January 1972. Four other low-level buildings were constructed as part of the World Trade Center in the early 1970s, and the complex was mostly complete by 1973. A seventh building, 7 World Trade Center , was opened in 1987.\n\nIn 1942, Austin J. Tobin became the Executive Director of the Port Authority , beginning a 30-year career during which he oversaw the planning and development of the World Trade Center. The concept of establishing a \" world trade center \" was conceived during the post– World War II period, when the United States thrived economically and international trade was increasing. At the time, economic growth was concentrated in Midtown Manhattan , in part stimulated by Rockefeller Center , which had been developed in the 1930s. \n\nIn 1946, a year after the war formally ended, the New York State Legislature passed a bill that called for a \"world trade center\" to be established. This trade center would increase New York City's role in transatlantic trade. The World Trade Corporation was founded, and a board was appointed by New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey to develop plans for the project. The concept was inspired by the Leipzig Trade Fair , which had been considered \"the marketplace of all Europe\" before being destroyed during World War II. Less than four months after the board was named, plans for a \"world trade center\" were put on hold. By then, architect John Eberson and his son Drew had devised a plan that included 21 buildings over a ten-block area, at an estimated cost of $150 million. Projections determined that such a complex would not be profitable due to a lack of demand. One estimated that the World Trade Center project would only be successful if at least 4,800 of the United States' largest 6,000 companies were involved. In 1949, the World Trade Corporation was dissolved by the New York State Legislature. \n\nMeanwhile, the Financial District of Lower Manhattan was left out of the economic boom of financial industries there. Lower Manhattan also saw less economic growth than Midtown because many workers moved to the suburbs, and they found it easier to commute to midtown than to downtown. The writer Paul Goldberger states that the Financial District, in particular, was devoid of \"almost any kind of urban amenity\", including entertainment, cultural hubs, or housing. Commercial industries along the ports of Lower Manhattan were also being replaced with industries elsewhere. David Rockefeller , who led urban renewal efforts in Lower Manhattan, constructed the One Chase Manhattan Plaza in a bid to bring jobs back. Rockefeller believed that the area would lose its status as the nation's financial hub if it were not redeveloped. However, the 800-foot (240 m) skyscraper, which opened in 1960, attracted far fewer tenants than expected. \n\nIn 1958, Rockefeller established the Downtown-Lower Manhattan Association (DLMA), which commissioned Skidmore, Owings and Merrill to draw up plans for revitalizing Lower Manhattan. The plans, made public in late June 1960, called for a World Trade Center to be built on a 13-acre (53,000 m 2 ) site along the East River , at the South Street Seaport , one of the Lower Manhattan ports that had seen a continuous decline in business over the past decade. The site would be bounded clockwise from the south by Old Slip , Water Street , Fulton Street , and South Street , and the complex itself would be located on \"a two-story platform that would supersede and displace the conventional street grid\". The proposed complex included a 900-foot-long (270 m) exhibition hall , as well as a 50- to 70-story building with a hotel located on some of its upper floors. Other amenities would include a theater, shops, and restaurants. The plan also called for a new securities exchange building, which the Downtown-Lower Manhattan Association hoped would house the New York Stock Exchange . \n\nDavid Rockefeller suggested that the Port Authority would be a logical choice for taking on the project because it had experience with similar large engineering projects, and also because the Port Authority, rather than Rockefeller, would be paying for the complex's construction. Rockefeller argued that the Trade Center would provide great benefits in facilitating and increasing volume of international commerce coming through the Port of New York and New Jersey . David's brother, New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller , formally asked the Port Authority to investigate the feasibility of this proposal. Given the importance of New York City in global commerce, Port Authority director Austin J. Tobin remarked that the proposed project should be the World Trade Center, and not just a generic \"world trade center\". Tobin commissioned an aide, Richard Sullivan, to lead a study on the feasibility of building a World Trade Center. \n\nSullivan published his study, \"A World Trade Center in the Port of New York\", on March 10, 1961. The report recommended building a trade center along the waterfront to facilitate commerce within the Port of New York. The study also stated that Rockefeller's suggested site near the South Street Seaport was the most ideal location for the trade center, but did not take locals' possible objections into account. The Port Authority formally backed the project the next day. \n\nThe States of New York and New Jersey also needed to approve the project, given their control and oversight role of the Port Authority. Objections to the plan came from New Jersey Governor Robert B. Meyner , who resented that New York would be getting the $355 million project. Meyner would only agree if his own state were able to benefit. He was particularly concerned about ridership on New Jersey's Hudson and Manhattan Railroad (H&M). The H&M's ridership had declined substantially from a high of 113 million riders in 1927 to 26 million in 1958, after new automobile tunnels and bridges opened across the Hudson River . \n\nThe H&M's Hudson Terminal , a large and mostly decrepit office-building complex along Manhattan's Lower West Side, was located in a neighborhood referred to as the Radio Row , which was also seeing a general decline due to a loss of transportation options. The ferries across the Hudson River, which had seen 51 million annual riders in 1920, had stopped running, while the area's elevated lines were being dismantled in favor of high-speed subways. For many years, New Jersey residents and elected officials had proposed that the Port Authority purchase the H&M Railroad, but each time, the Port Authority had refused. Meyner suggested that he would support the plans for the World Trade Center project if the Port Authority took over the H&M. The Port Authority then started conducting another study on Meyner's suggestion of a H&M takeover. \n\nIn February 1961, Governor Rockefeller introduced a bill that would combine the H&M's $70 million acquisition with the $335 million trade center at South Street. Even though Nelson Rockefeller had been warned of the hastiness of the deal, as it highlighted the price disparity between the two agreements, the New York state legislature approved the bill anyway. Subsequently, negotiations with Governor Meyner regarding the World Trade Center project reached a stalemate. Months later, Sullivan was contacted by a colleague, Sidney Schachter, who had surveyed Hudson Terminal. After taking a walk around the Radio Row neighborhood, Schachter concluded that the site could be used for the World Trade Center. This would carry multiple benefits: the obsolete Hudson Terminal could be replaced with more modern office buildings; the H&M would get a new railway terminal; and the World Trade Center could be built without objections from New Jersey. Through the end of the year, the Port Authority continued to investigate the feasibility of taking over the H&M. \n\nIn December 1961, Tobin had several meetings with newly elected New Jersey Governor Richard J. Hughes . They ultimately agreed to a proposal to shift the World Trade Center project to the site of the H&M's Hudson Terminal. The new location not only was closer to New Jersey, but also was able to utilize the unused air rights above the Hudson Terminal: although other developers were theoretically allowed to build atop the terminal, none had done so. In acquiring the Hudson & Manhattan Railroad, the Port Authority would also acquire the Hudson Terminal and other buildings, which were deemed obsolete. On January 22, 1962, the two states reached an agreement to allow the Port Authority to take over the railroad and to build the World Trade Center on Manhattan's lower west side. As part of the deal, the Port Authority renamed the H&M \"Port Authority Trans-Hudson\", or PATH for short. The New Jersey state legislature approved this deal in February 1962. After the World Trade Center legislation was approved by the New Jersey legislature, Chairman Tobin formed the World Trade Office to develop and operate the trade center, appointing Guy F. Tozzoli to lead the new office. \n\nThe new site constituted a mostly trapezoidal plot of land, with an extension on the north that resembled a \"cork\". The bulk of the land was a twelve-block area bounded by Vesey, Church, Liberty, and West Streets on the north, east, south, and west, respectively. All of these blocks would be combined to form the superblock upon which the World Trade Center was built. The \"cork\" was a smaller trapezoid bounded clockwise from the north by Barclay Street, West Broadway, Vesey Street, and Washington Street. This would become the site of 7 World Trade Center , although that building was not added until much later. The two blocks to the west and east of the \"cork\" were occupied by the New York Telephone Company Building and the Federal Building, respectively. \n\nThe site for the World Trade Center was the location of Radio Row, which was home to 323 commercial or industrial tenants, over one thousand offices, many small businesses, and approximately 100 residents. Estimates indicated that either 17,200 or 30,000 employees worked within the area that was to be occupied by the World Trade Center, and that the businesses employing them made a combined $300 million in profits every year. The World Trade Center plans involved evicting these business owners, some of whom strongly dissented to the forced relocation. The group protesting against the evictions was led by Oscar Nadel, one of the business owners who was facing eviction. Newspapers published stories about small-business owners who would be affected by the evictions, while residents and tenants went around the neighborhood, carrying the effigy of a \"Mr. Small Businessman\" in a mock funeral. \n\nThe Port Authority opened an office to assist tenants with relocation; although this offer was accepted by some tenants, it was protested by others. The agency refused to meet with large groups of merchants, instead saying that concerned tenants meet with Port Authority officials one-by-one. Nadel believed that this would allow the Port Authority to convince individual tenants to move out, thus causing an exodus of merchants from the area. As the merchants' de facto spokesperson, he requested a meeting with Tobin directly. When the meeting occurred in mid-June 1962, Nadel immediately rejected Tobin's proposal to give him a storefront space in the World Trade Center. Two weeks later, a group representing approximately 325 shops and 1,000 other affected small businesses filed an injunction , challenging the Port Authority's power of eminent domain , or the takeover of private property for public use. \n\nThe dispute with local business owners went through the court system to the New York State Court of Appeals . Although several lower courts refused to hear the merchants' cases, they also ruled that the World Trade Center did not serve a \"public purpose\" and that the plan had caused harm to Radio Row merchants, contrary to what Tobin had claimed. In response, Tobin announced that the lower courts had ruled on the constitutional question of \"public purpose\", prompting an appellate judge to issue a public rebuke for Tobin's \"extramural misrepresentation\" of the outcome. Tobin changed his offer to the merchants, offering to relocate them to a new electronics complex and delay demolition until 1964. In public, he acted as though the judges had already ruled in his favor on the constitutional question. In February 1963, the New York Court of Appeals ruled that the World Trade Center did not constitute a \"public purpose\", thereby nullifying the Port Authority's land acquisition. The Port Authority immediately appealed, and in April, the same court reversed its previous decision, upholding the Port Authority's right of eminent domain and saying that the project had a \"public purpose\". The merchants then appealed to the United States Supreme Court . On November 12, 1963, the Supreme Court rejected the case, stating that it lacked proof of needing federal action . \n\nUnder the state law, the Port Authority was required to assist business owners in relocating, something it had been doing since 1962. However, many business owners regarded what the Port Authority offered as inadequate. Questions continued while the World Trade Center was constructed, as to whether the Port Authority really ought to take on the project, described by some as a \"mistaken social priority.\" \n\nAfter New Jersey approved of the World Trade Center project, the Port Authority started looking for tenants. First, the agency approached the United States Customs Service because the Customs Service had been dissatisfied with its current headquarters, the Alexander Hamilton U.S. Custom House on the tip of Lower Manhattan. The Port Authority then solicited the New York state government, since there were too few private companies willing to move to the World Trade Center. The World Trade Center's planners were concerned that the World Trade Center would be underused, because at the time, less than 3.8% of the United States' gross national product came from international trade, and corporations with a worldwide presence comprised four-fifths of that sector. In January 1964, the Port Authority certified a deal with the New York state government to relocate some offices to the World Trade Center. The Port Authority began signing commercial tenants in the spring and summer of 1964, including several banks. The Port Authority signed the United States Customs Service as a tenant a year later. \n\nAfter considering these facts, Tobin and Tozzoli determined that the only way to make the World Trade Center appealing to private entities was to make the trade center the world's largest. This resulted in an enlargement of plans for the entire trade center, which was originally supposed to include only 5 to 6 million square feet (460,000 to 560,000 m 2 ) of floor space. After the release of the feasibility report for the new site, this figure increased to at least 6 million square feet (560,000 m 2 ) of floor space, making the World Trade Center about as large as the Pentagon , the world's largest office building at the time. However, after directing his staff to inspect the proposed trade center's new site at Radio Row, Tobin decided to increase the amount of floor space further, to at least 10 million square feet (930,000 m 2 ). Fearing controversy, Tobin kept this plan secret from the public. \n\nTozzoli dismissed the three planners who had worked on the original World Trade Center study, due to their lack of creative designs for the World Trade Center complex. He then went to Seattle to meet with architect Minoru Yamasaki . Tozzoli had a general idea of what should be in the trade center, but had not yet devised the specific details of the design. Prior to this meeting, Yamasaki's only high-rise construction project was the Michigan Consolidated Gas Company 's 30-story tower in Detroit. As a result, Yamasaki initially thought that the offer for him to build a $280,000,000 world trade center in New York City was a typo. After it was clarified that the offer was not made in error, Yamasaki presented his \"big and unmistakable, yet intimate and humane\" proposal for the trade center to the Port Authority board in June 1962. The author Paul Goldberger wrote that Yamasaki \"presented himself as an aesthete\" to the Port Authority board, which was mostly composed of engineers. Following this meeting, a group of Port Authority planners began looking through Yamasaki's prior projects. \n\nOn September 20, 1962, after an exhaustive search for architects, the Port Authority announced the selection of Yamasaki as lead architect, and Emery Roth & Sons as associate architects. Originally, Yamasaki submitted to the Port Authority a concept incorporating twin towers, but with each building only 80 stories tall. Yamasaki remarked that the \"obvious alternative, a group of several large buildings, would have looked like a housing project.\" \n\nThe Port Authority mandated that 10 million square feet (930,000 m 2 ) of office space be included in the new World Trade Center, but tasked Yamasaki with determining how to arrange that space. As a result, Yamasaki tested out different possible designs, including spreading out the space across three or four towers, as well as condensing the space within two 80-story towers. His other plans included a single, very large tower and ten moderately large buildings. He favored the 80-story twin-tower plan, but found that it did not meet the Port Authority's requirements. At the time, it was not considered economical to build an office building with more than 80 floors. \n\nAnother major limiting factor in the buildings' designs was elevators . As the building got taller, more elevators were needed to service the building, which required more elevator banks that in turn took up space. Yamasaki and the engineers decided to use a new system that included sky lobbies , which are floors where people can switch from a large-capacity express elevator, which goes only to the sky lobbies, to a local elevator that goes to each floor in a section. Thus, the local elevators can be stacked within the same elevator shaft. Located on the 44th and 78th floors of each tower, the sky lobbies enabled the elevators to be used efficiently, while also increasing the amount of usable space on each floor from 62 to 75 percent by reducing the number of required elevator shafts. The World Trade Center towers were the second supertall buildings to use sky lobbies, after the John Hancock Center in Chicago. This system was inspired by the New York City Subway , whose lines include local stations, where only local trains stop, and express stations, where all trains stop. This allowed the towers' heights to be increased to 110 floors without the top floors being economically unfeasible. \n\nYamasaki's final design for the World Trade Center was unveiled to the public on January 18, 1964, with an eight-foot model. The towers had a square plan, approximately 207 feet (63 m) in dimension on each side. The buildings were designed with narrow office windows, only 18 inches (45 cm) wide, which reflected on Yamasaki's fear of heights and desire to make building occupants feel secure. The windows only covered 30% of the buildings' exteriors, making them look like solid metal slabs from a distance, though this was also a byproduct of the structural systems that held up the towers. Yamasaki's design called for the building facades to be sheathed in aluminum-alloy. \n\nYamasaki, who had previously designed Saudi Arabia 's Dhahran International Airport with the Saudi Binladin Group , incorporated features of Arabic architecture into the design of the World Trade Center. The Austin J. Tobin Plaza was modelled after Mecca , incorporating features such as a vast delineated square, a fountain , and a radial circular pattern. Yamasaki described the plaza as \"a mecca, a great relief from the narrow streets and sidewalks of the Wall Street area.\" He also incorporated other features of Arabic architecture into the building design, including pointed arches , interweaving tracery of prefabricated concrete, a minaret like flight tower, and arabesque patterns. \n\nThe World Trade Center design brought criticism of its aesthetics from the American Institute of Architects and other groups. Lewis Mumford , author of The City in History and other works on urban planning , criticized the project and described it and other new skyscrapers as \"just glass-and-metal filing cabinets.\" Television broadcasters raised concerns that the World Trade Center twin towers would cause interference in television reception for viewers in the New York City area , who were getting their broadcasts from the Empire State Building at that time. In response to these concerns, the Port Authority offered to provide new television transmission facilities at the World Trade Center. The Linnaean Society of the American Museum of Natural History also opposed the Trade Center project, citing hazards the buildings would impose on migrating birds . \n\nThe structural engineering firm Worthington, Skilling, Helle & Jackson worked to implement Yamasaki's design, developing a framed-tube structural system that was used in the buildings. The Port Authority's Engineering Department served as foundation engineers , Joseph R. Loring & Associates as electrical engineers , and Jaros, Baum & Bolles (JB&B) as mechanical engineers . Tishman Realty & Construction Company was the general contractor on the World Trade Center project. Guy F. Tozzoli, director of the World Trade Department at the Port Authority, and Rino M. Monti, the Port Authority's Chief Engineer, oversaw the project. \n\nAs an interstate agency, the Port Authority was not subject to local laws and regulations of the City of New York, including building codes . Nonetheless, the Port Authority required architects and structural engineers to follow the New York City building codes. At the time when the World Trade Center was planned, new building codes were being devised to replace the 1938 version that was still in place. The structural engineers ended up following draft versions of the new 1968 building codes, which incorporated \"advanced techniques\" in building design . \n\nThe World Trade Center towers included many structural engineering innovations in skyscraper design and construction , which allowed the buildings to reach new heights and become the tallest in the world. Traditionally, skyscrapers used a skeleton of columns distributed throughout the interior to support building loads, with interior columns disrupting the floor space. The framed-tube concept, earlier introduced by Bangladeshi-American structural engineer Fazlur Rahman Khan , was a major innovation, allowing open floor plans and more space to rent. The tube-frame design required 40 percent less structural steel than conventional building designs. \n\nThe buildings used high-strength, load-bearing perimeter steel columns which acted as Vierendeel trusses . Although the columns themselves were lightweight, they were spaced closely together, forming a strong, rigid wall structure. There were 59 perimeter columns, narrowly spaced, on each side of the buildings. In all, the perimeter walls of the towers were 210 feet (64 m) on each side, and the corners were beveled . The perimeter columns were designed to provide support for virtually all lateral loads (such as wind loads) and to share the gravity loads with the core columns. Structural analysis of major portions of the World Trade Center were computed on an IBM 1620 . \n\nThe perimeter structure was constructed of prefabricated modular pieces, which consisted of three columns, three stories tall, connected by spandrel plates. The perimeter columns had a square cross section, 14 inches (36 cm) on a side, and were constructed of welded steel plate. The thickness of the plates and grade of structural steel varied over the height of the tower, ranging from 36,000 to 100,000 pounds per square inch (260 to 670 MPa). [ a ] The thickness of the steel plates decreased with height because they were required to support lesser amounts of building mass and wind loads on higher floors. However, the steel grade increased with height. Columns were made of higher grades than spandrels. Steel grade was higher near the corner. From the 7th floor to the ground level, and down to the foundation, the columns were spaced 10 feet (3.0 m) apart to accommodate doorways. All columns were placed on bedrock , which, unlike that in Midtown Manhattan, where the bedrock is shallow, is at 65–85 feet (20–26 m) below the surface. \n\nThe spandrel plates, typically 52 inches (1.3 m) deep, were welded to the exterior columns to create the modular pieces off-site at the fabrication shop. Each of the modular pieces typically weighed 22 tons and was 10 feet (3.0 m) wide and 24 to 36 feet (7.3 to 11.0 m) tall, spanning two or three floors. Adjacent modules were bolted together, with the splices occurring at mid-span of the columns and spandrels. The spandrel plates were located at each floor, transmitting shear stress between columns, allowing them to work together in resisting lateral loads. Other than at the mechanical floors, the joints between modules were staggered vertically, so the column splices between adjacent modules were not at the same floor. \n\nThe building's core housed the elevator and utility shafts, restrooms, three stairwells, and other support spaces. The core of each tower was a rectangular area 87 by 135 feet (27 by 41 m), and contained 47 steel columns running from the bedrock to the top of the tower. The North Tower's structural core was oriented with the long axis east to west, while the South Tower's was oriented north to south. \n\nThe core columns supported about half the towers' weight. The core was surrounded by a girder to which were connected the inner ends of the floor trusses. The 16 columns which supported the long span trusses were particularly large, accounting for half of the core's loads. Of this, 40 percent came from the corner columns which supported the transfer trusses. Conversely, the seven innermost columns were quite small, carrying only about 3 percent. \n\nThe columns were made almost exclusively of 36ksi or 42ksi steel, and gradually switched from rectangular box sections to tapering box sections to wide flange sections at higher floors. Typical columns were box columns for most of their height. Box columns maintained a constant width of predominantly 22 in (560 mm), 16 in (410 mm), or 14 in (360 mm). In the lower third of the building, they also maintained a constant depth of predominantly 52 and 36 inches (1,320 and 910 mm). The smallest columns were wide flange sections for most of their height. Wide flange sections were mostly 14 inch, followed by 12 inch sections. 42ksi and higher steel grades were predominantly present in these columns. \n\nAll elevators were located in the core. Each building had three stairwells, also in the core, except on the mechanical floors where the two outside stairwells temporarily left the core in order to avoid the express elevator machine rooms, and then rejoined the core by means of a transfer corridor. It was this arrangement that allowed Stairwell A of the South Tower to remain passable after the aircraft impact on September 11, 2001. \n\nThe large, column-free space between the perimeter and core was bridged by prefabricated floor trusses. The floors supported their own weight, as well as live loads , provided lateral stability to the exterior walls, and distributed wind loads among the exterior walls. The floors consisted of 4-inch (10 cm) thick lightweight concrete slabs laid on a fluted steel deck with shear connections for composite action . A grid of lightweight bridging trusses and main trusses supported the floors. The trusses had a span of 60 feet (18 m) in the long-span areas and 35 feet (11 m) in the short span area. \n\nThe trusses connected to the perimeter at alternate columns, and were on 6-foot-8-inch (2.03 m) centers. The top chords of the trusses were bolted to seats welded to the spandrels on the exterior side and a channel welded to the core columns on the interior side. The floors were connected to the perimeter spandrel plates with viscoelastic dampers, which helped reduce the amount of sway felt by building occupants. \n\nHat trusses (or \"outrigger truss\") located from the 107th floor to the top of the buildings were designed to support a tall communication antenna on top of each building. Only the north tower, 1 World Trade Center, actually had an antenna fitted, which was added in 1978. \n\nThe framed-tube design using steel core and perimeter columns protected with sprayed-on fire resistant material created a relatively lightweight structure that would sway more in response to the wind, compared to traditional structures such as the Empire State Building that have thick, heavy masonry for fireproofing of steel structural elements. During the design process, wind tunnel tests were done at Colorado State University and at the National Physical Laboratory in the United Kingdom to establish design wind pressures that the World Trade Center towers could be subjected to and structural response to those forces. \n\nExperiments were also done to evaluate how much sway occupants could tolerate. Subjects were recruited for \"free eye exams,\" while the real purpose of the experiment was to subject them to simulated building sway and find out how much they could comfortably tolerate. Many subjects did not respond well, experiencing dizziness and other ill effects. One of the chief engineers Leslie Robertson worked with Canadian engineer Alan G. Davenport to develop viscoelastic dampers to absorb some of the sway. These viscoelastic dampers, used throughout the structures at the joints between floor trusses and perimeter columns, along with some other structural modifications reduced the building sway to an acceptable level. \n\nThe structural engineers on the project also considered the possibility that an aircraft could crash into the building. In July 1945, a B-25 bomber that was lost in the fog had crashed into the 78th and 79th floors of the Empire State Building. A year later, another airplane crashed into the 40 Wall Street building, and there was another close call at the Empire State Building. In designing the World Trade Center, Leslie Robertson considered the scenario of the impact of a jet airliner, the Boeing 707 , which might be lost in the fog, seeking to land at JFK or at Newark airports. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) found a three-page white paper that mentioned another aircraft impact analysis, involving impact of a jet at 600 mph (970 km/h), was indeed considered, but NIST could not locate the documentary evidence of the aircraft impact analysis. \n\nSprayed-fire resistant materials (SFRMs) were used to protect some structural steel elements in the towers, including all floor trusses and beams. Gypsum wallboard in combination with SFRMs, or in some cases gypsum wallboard alone, was used to protect core columns. Vermiculite plaster was used on the interior-side and SFRMs on the other three sides of the perimeter columns for fire protection. The 1968 New York City building codes were more lenient in some aspects of fire protection, such as allowing three exit stairwells in the World Trade Center towers, instead of six as required under older building codes. On April 27, 1970, the New York City Department of Air Resources ordered the World Trade Center's contractors to stop the spraying of asbestos as an insulating material. \n\nMore fireproofing was added after a fire in February 1975 that spread to six floors before being extinguished. After the 1993 bombing , inspections found fireproofing to be deficient. The Port Authority was in the process of replacing it, but replacement had been completed on only 18 floors in the North Tower, including all the floors affected by the aircraft impact and fires on September 11, and on 13 floors in the South Tower, although only three of these floors (77, 78, and 85) were directly affected by the aircraft impact. \n\nThe 1968 New York City building codes did not require sprinklers for high-rise buildings, except for underground spaces. In accordance with building codes, sprinklers were originally installed only in the underground parking structures of the World Trade Center. Following a major fire in February 1975, the Port Authority decided to start installing sprinklers throughout the buildings. By 1993, nearly all of the South Tower and 85 percent of the North Tower had sprinklers installed and the entire complex was retrofitted by 2001. \n\nEven once the agreement between the states of New Jersey, New York, and the Port Authority had been finalized in 1962, the World Trade Center plan faced continued controversy. New York City Mayor Robert F. Wagner Jr. did not like that the city had a very small stake in the trade center's planning process. Wagner had heard of the revised West Side site through the Newark Evening News , and he stated that the Port Authority had regarded the city as an \"outsider rather than the central figure\" during the planning process. Wagner wanted the agreement to be delayed until the city could express its opinion regarding the deal. The city and Port Authority hosted a series of meetings to discuss the details of the World Trade Center. However, the city was at a disadvantage since it only had jurisdiction over the streets in the World Trade Center site, but had no say in the site's condemnations. The city used this fact as leverage once private developers announced their opposition to the project. \n\nBy 1964, when the intended scale of the scheme had been made public with plans for twin 110-story towers, private real estate developers and members of the Real Estate Board of New York also expressed concerns about the World Trade Center's much-\"subsidized\" office space going on the open market, competing with the many vacancies in the private sector. One notable critic was Lawrence Wien , a co-owner of the Empire State Building, which would lose its title of tallest building in the world . Wien organized a group of builders into a group called the \"Committee for a Reasonable World Trade Center\" to demand that the project be scaled down. This group approached the city for assistance in trying to reduce the size of the World Trade Center project. They claimed that the large amount of floor space in the World Trade Center would create an excess of real estate, causing a reduction in other developers' profits. The city and developers used a myriad of arguments to stall construction for two years. \n\nWagner's successor, John Lindsay , and the New York City Council raised concerns about the limited extent that the Port Authority involved the city in the negotiations and deliberations. Negotiations between the New York City government and the Port Authority were centered on tax issues: the Port Authority offered to pay the city an extra $4 million per year in exchange for foregoing tax payments, while the city wanted four times the amount the Port Authority was offering. This dispute went on for two years, during which the projected price of the World Trade Center increased sharply. The original estimates put forth by the Port Authority had the costs for construction of the World Trade Center at $350 million—an optimistic figure. \n\nIn December 1966, the Port Authority announced increased cost estimates, bringing the estimated total to $575 million. This announcement brought criticism of the project from private real estate developers, The New York Times , and others in New York City. The critics stated that the Port Authority figure was an unrealistically low estimate, and they estimated the project would end up costing $750 million. By the time the World Trade Center twin towers were ultimately completed, the total costs to the Port Authority had reached $900 million. \n\nBy July 1966, neither the city or the Port Authority were able to come to an agreement. However, negotiations soon resumed, and a final agreement was made on August 3, 1966. As part of the agreement, the Port Authority would make annual payments to the City, in lieu of taxes, for the portion of the World Trade Center leased to private tenants. As part of the agreement, the city would build the New York Passenger Ship Terminal in Hell's Kitchen, Manhattan , while the Port Authority would build the South Brooklyn Marine Terminal . In subsequent years, the payments would rise as the real estate tax rate increased. The project would be financed through tax-exempt bonds issued by the Port Authority. \n\nIn March 1965, the Port Authority began acquiring property at the World Trade Center site. The Ajax Wrecking and Lumber Corporation was hired for the demolition work, which began on March 21, 1965, to clear the site for construction of the World Trade Center. \n\nGroundbreaking was on August 5, 1966, marking the beginning of construction of the World Trade Center's foundations. The site of the World Trade Center was located on landfill , with the bedrock located 65 feet (20 m) below grade. In order to construct the World Trade Center, it was necessary to build \"The Bathtub\", with the slurry wall along the West Street side of the site, to keep water from the Hudson River out. This method was used in place of conventional dewatering methods because lowering the groundwater table would cause large settlements of nearby buildings not built on deep foundations . \n\nThe slurry method involved digging a trench , and as excavation proceeded, filling the space with a slurry mixture. The mixture, composed of bentonite , plugged holes and kept water out. When the trench was dug out, a steel cage was inserted and concrete was poured in, forcing the slurry out. The slurry method was devised by Port Authority chief engineer John M. Kyle Jr. Towards the end of 1966, work began on building the slurry wall, led by Montreal -based Icanda, a subsidiary of an Italian engineering firm, Impresa Costruzioni Opere Specializzate (I.C.O.S.). It took fourteen months for the slurry wall to be completed, which was necessary before excavation of material from the interior of the site could begin. The original Hudson Tubes , which carried PATH trains into Hudson Terminal, remained in service as elevated tunnels until 1971 when a new PATH station was built. \n\nConstruction work on the North Tower began in August 1968 with construction beginning on the South Tower by January 1969. In January 1967, the Pacific Car and Foundry Company , Laclede Steel Company , Granite City Steel Company , and Karl Koch Erecting Company were awarded $74 million in contracts to supply steel for the project. The Port Authority chose to use many different steel suppliers, bidding on smaller portions of steel, rather than buy larger amounts from a single source such as Bethlehem Steel or U.S. Steel as a cost-saving measure. Karl Koch was also hired to do all the work of erecting the steel, and a contract for work on the aluminum facade was awarded to the Aluminum Company of America . Tishman Realty & Construction was hired in February 1967 to oversee construction of the project. \n\nExtensive use of prefabricated parts for the perimeter framing and floor truss systems helped speed up the construction process and reduce costs, while providing greater quality control . Steel components were freighted into a Penn Central (later Conrail and now CSX ) yard in Jersey City . From there, they were brought in the early morning hours through the Holland Tunnel to the construction site, then lifted into place by a crane . Larger pieces were brought to the construction site by tugboats . A special type of crane, suitable for constructing such tall buildings, that used hydraulics to lift components and provided its own power was used in construction of the World Trade Center. The Favco Standard 2700 Crane, manufactured by Favelle Mort Ltd. of New South Wales , Australia was informally called a \" kangaroo crane .\" \n\nIn 1970, tugboat workers went on strike , halting the transport of material to the construction site. The Port Authority attempted other means of transporting material, including via helicopter . When this method was tried, the helicopter lost its load of steel into the Kill Van Kull . Some other mishaps occurred during the construction process, including disruption of telephone service in Lower Manhattan when telephone cables were crushed by pile drivers . On March 16, 1970, an explosion injured six workers when a truck hit a propane tank. \n\nThe topping out ceremony of the North Tower (1 World Trade Center) took place on December 23, 1970, while the South Tower (2 World Trade Center)'s ceremony occurred on July 19, 1971. The first tenants moved into the North Tower on December 15, 1970, and into the South Tower in January 1972. The buildings were dedicated on April 4, 1973; Tobin, who had resigned the year before, was absent from the ceremonies. \n\nBuilding the World Trade Center involved excavating 1,200,000 cubic yards (920,000 m 3 ) of material. Rather than transporting this material at great costs out to sea or to landfills in New Jersey, the fill material was used to expand the Manhattan shoreline across West Street. Work to demolish the piers began on January 5, 1967, including Pier 7 to Pier 11 which were all constructed around 1910. The demolition work moved forward, despite conflicts between David Rockefeller, Governor Nelson Rockefeller , and Mayor John Lindsay regarding plans for Battery Park City . Landfill material from the World Trade Center was used to add land, and a cellular cofferdam was constructed to retain the material. The result was a 700-foot (210 m) extension into the Hudson River, running six blocks or 1,484 feet (452 m). This land was a \"gift\" to New York City, allowing more tax-generating developments in Battery Park City. \n\nThe World Trade Center complex included four other smaller buildings constructed during the 1970s and early 1980s. 3 World Trade Center was a 22-story building, which was home to the Marriott World Trade Center . It was designed by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill in 1978–79. 4 World Trade Center , 5 World Trade Center , and 6 World Trade Center were all 8–9 story buildings that were designed by the same team as the Twin Towers, including Minoru Yamasaki; Emery Roth & Sons; and Skilling, Helle, Christiansen, Robertson. 7 World Trade Center was built in the mid-1980s, just north of the main World Trade Center site. The 47-story building was designed by Emery Roth & Sons, and constructed on top of a Con Edison power substation . \n\nOver time, numerous structural modifications were made to suit the needs of tenants in the Twin Towers. Modifications were made in accordance with the Port Authority's Tenant Alteration Review Manual and were reviewed by the Port Authority to ensure the changes did not compromise structural integrity of the buildings. In many instances, openings were cut in the floors to accommodate new stairways to connect tenant floors. Some steel beams in the core were reinforced and strengthened to accommodate heavy live loads, such as large amounts of heavy files that tenants had on their floors. \n\nRepairs to structural elements on the lower levels of 1 WTC were made following the 1993 bombing. The greatest damage occurred on levels B1 and B2, with significant structural damage also on level B3. Primary structural columns were not damaged, but secondary steel members experienced some damage. Floors that were blown out needed to be repaired to restore the structural support they provided to columns. The slurry wall was in peril following the bombing and loss of the floor slabs which provided lateral support to counteract pressure from Hudson River water on the other side. \n\nThe refrigeration plant on sublevel B5, which provided air conditioning to the entire World Trade Center complex, was heavily damaged and replaced with a temporary system for the summer of 1993. The fire alarm system for the entire complex needed to be replaced, after critical wiring and signaling in the original system was destroyed in the 1993 bombing. Installation of the new system took years to complete; replacement of some components was still underway in September 2001, at the time of the attacks that ultimately destroyed the complex. \n\n40°42′42″N 74°00′49″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.71167°N 74.01361°W ﻿ / 40.71167; -74.01361",
  "A scenographer or scenic designer , also production designer , is a person who develops the appearance of a stage design , a TV or movie set, a gaming environment, a trade fair exhibition design or a museum experience exhibition design. The term originated in theater . A scenographer works together with the theater director to make the message come through in the best way they think possible, the director having the leading role and responsibility particularly for dramatic aspects - such as casting, acting, and direction - and the scenographer primarily responsible for the visual aspects or \"look\" of the production - which often includes scenery or sets, lighting, and costumes, and may include projections or other aspects.\n\nWhile a common role in theatrical production teams in most countries, the position of scenographer is very uncommon in the United States, where this task is generally parcelled out among several people, principally the scenic or set designer who generally spearheads the visual aspects of the production. The production's design team often includes a production team that includes a director , scenic or set designer , lighting designer , costume designer , sound designer , dramaturg , stage manager , and production manager .\n\nThis job-, occupation-, or vocation-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .\n\nThis stagecraft related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Barberêche ( French pronunciation: [baʁbəʁɛʃ] ; German : Bärfischen ; Arpitan : Barberêtse [baʁbəˈʁɛtsə] ⓘ ) is a former municipality in the district of Lac in the Swiss canton of Fribourg . It lies on the \"language boundary\" between the French - and German -speaking parts of Switzerland . On 1 January 2017 it merged with Villarepos and Wallenried into the extant municipality of Courtepin . \n\nThe Barberêche area was settled quite early on, as witnessed by archaeological finds of graves from Hallstatt times and foundations from Roman times .\n\nThe first documentary mention of Barberêche dates from 1154 under the name Barbereschi . Later names included Barberesche (1173), Barbaresche (1180), Barbareschi (1182) and Barbarica (1423). The placename goes back to an old family name Barbar(i)us .\n\nThere is evidence to show that, as of the 12th century, there was a noble family in Barberêche. The Barberêche Lordship fell in the beginning under the Dukes of Zähringen , and then later became a fiefdom of the Counts of Thierstein , before a series of changes in ownership in the 15th century. In 1442, Barberêche became part of the Alte Landschaft (\"Old Territory\") of Fribourg (Spitalpanner). After the collapse of the Ancien Régime in 1798, during the Helvetic Republic and the time following, the village belonged to the District of Fribourg, and from 1831 to the German District of Fribourg, before it was annexed to the Seebezirk (\"Lake District\") under the new cantonal constitution in 1848.\n\nBarberêche had an area, as of 2009 [update] , of 9.2 square kilometers (3.6 sq mi). Of this area, 5.47 km 2 (2.11 sq mi) or 59.7% is used for agricultural purposes, while 1.82 km 2 (0.70 sq mi) or 19.8% is forested. Of the rest of the land, 0.52 km 2 (0.20 sq mi) or 5.7% is settled (buildings or roads), 1.32 km 2 (0.51 sq mi) or 14.4% is either rivers or lakes. \n\nOf the built up area, housing and buildings made up 2.8% and transportation infrastructure made up 2.4%. Out of the forested land, all of the forested land area is covered with heavy forests. Of the agricultural land, 39.0% is used for growing crops and 19.3% is pastures, while 1.3% is used for orchards or vine crops. All the water in the municipality is in lakes. \n\nBarberêche lies 569 m (1,867 ft) above sea level , and is 5.5 km (3.4 mi) north of the cantonal capital, Fribourg (Freiburg). The surrounding rural municipality stretches along the north shore of the Schiffenensee , a small lake through which flows the river Saane/Sarine , at the foot of the Grand Bois (\"Great Wood\") hill on the Swiss plateau .\n\nThe former municipality's area includes a part of the Swiss plateau's molasse uplands . The sprawling, yet narrow, area is bordered on the southeast by the Schiffenensee. All along this reservoir 's shoreline in the Barberêche area is a 20 to 50 m (66 to 164 ft) high dike topped with trees, broken here and there by sandstone cliffs . Several gullies carved by erosion empty into the lake ; these have been partially flooded owing to the creation of the reservoir. The gullies divide the terrace that Barberêche is built on into several small plateaux , which themselves are abutted in the northwest by the molasse hill.\n\nIn the farthest south and southwest, the former municipality area reaches beyond the Courtepin Valley to the flats at the mouth of the stream La Sonnaz where it empties into the Schiffenensee. From here westwards, the district stretches to the Bois de la Corbaz (a wood), which reaches 650 m (2,130 ft) above sea level, and to the edge of the Bois de l'Hôpital (\"Hospital Wood\") (660 m [2,170 ft] above sea level). Towards the northeast, the former municipality stretches over the Breilles Heights — which at 668 m (2,192 ft) above sea level are Barberêche's highest point — the Bouley Forest, and the Grand Bois, as well as the Bulliardholz (another wood; 660 m [2,170 ft]), and on to the foot of the \"Great Wood\" ( Grossholz ) at Kleingurmels .\n\nBarberêche consists of several centres, namely:\n\nNeighboring municipalities to Barberêche are La Sonnaz , Misery-Courtion , Courtepin , Gurmels and Düdingen .\n\nThe blazon of the municipal coat of arms is Per fess Gules a Cross bottony Argent and Argent a Rose Gules barbed Vert. \n\nBarberêche had a population (as of 2015 [update] ) of 527. As of 2008 [update] , 13.0% of the population are resident foreign nationals. The most heavily populated place in the municipality is Pensier with about 250 people; only about 100 people live in the village of Barberêche itself.\n\nOver the last 10 years (2000–2010) the population has changed at a rate of -5.9%. Migration accounted for -1.4%, while births and deaths accounted for 2.8%. \n\nAs of 2008 [update] , the population was 51.1% male and 48.9% female. The population was made up of 247 Swiss men (45.7% of the population) and 29 (5.4%) non-Swiss men. There were 216 Swiss women (40.0%) and 48 (8.9%) non-Swiss women. Of the population in the municipality, 171 or about 31.0% were born in Barberêche and lived there in 2000. There were 191 or 34.7% who were born in the same canton, while 100 or 18.1% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 82 or 14.9% were born outside of Switzerland. As of 2000 [update] , children and teenagers (0–19 years old) make up 20.7% of the population, while adults (20–64 years old) make up 65% and seniors (over 64 years old) make up 14.3%. As of 2000 [update] , there were 253 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 254 married individuals, 27 widows or widowers and 17 individuals who are divorced. \n\nAs of 2000 [update] , there were 184 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.6 persons per household. There were 51 households that consist of only one person and 22 households with five or more people. In 2000 [update] , a total of 172 apartments (82.3% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 31 apartments (14.8%) were seasonally occupied and 6 apartments (2.9%) were empty. The vacancy rate for the municipality, in 2010 [update] , was 0.47%. \n\nThe historical population is given in the following chart: \n\nGrand-Vivy Castle , Barberêche Castle , Petit-Vivy Castle , the barn and stable at Chemin de la Fruiterie 5 A and the granary at Route de Grimoine 20 B are listed as Swiss heritage site of national significance . The area around Petit and Grand-Vivy is part of the Inventory of Swiss Heritage Sites . \n\nThe oldest parts of the parish church of Saint Maurice date back to the 11th century. It was enlarged in 1785-86 and underwent modifications in the 19th century. It has a quire with a semicircular apse and overhanging arcades in early mediaeval style. The church contains wall paintings from the 18th century, woodcarvings , and coats of arms in the stained glass . The parsonage next to the church dates from 1566.\n\nOn the edge of the plateau, right above the Schiffenensee, stands Barberêche Castle. It was built between 1522 and 1528, likely on the site of an earlier fortification , under Petermann de Praroman's direction in the late Gothic style . From 1839 until 1844, the castle underwent considerable remodeling , whereby the castle took its current shape in the neo-Gothic and neoclassical styles. The castle is today privately owned.\n\nFurthermore, over the dike surrounding the Schiffenensee, northeast of Barberêche, stands Petit-Vivy Castle. It is among the oldest preserved castles in the region. The still-preserved, mighty, four-sided keep was built in the second half of the 13th century, and has 3.5-m-thick walls. Around the keep are the remains of former surrounding walls, arranged in triangular form. The residential buildings were built in the 16th century.\n\nFarther northeast is Grand-Vivy Castle on a narrow outcrop between the Schiffenensee and a small stream. This was also the site of a medieval castle, but this was replaced by today's late-Gothic structure with its semicircular stairway tower, and other tower construction. The chapel next to the castle was built in the 19th century.\n\nBarberêche is twinned with the town of Zeuthen , Germany . \n\nIn the 2011 federal election the most popular party was the SPS which received 24.9% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the CVP (22.6%), the SVP (20.3%) and the FDP (8.7%). \n\nThe SPS improved their position in Barberêche rising to first, from third in 2007 (with 18.5%) The CVP retained about the same popularity (22.5% in 2007), the SVP moved from first in 2007 (with 25.0%) to third and the FDP retained about the same popularity (10.4% in 2007). A total of 205 votes were cast in this election, of which 3 or 1.5% were invalid. \n\nBarberêche was until the second half of the 20th century a village whose livelihood was firmly rooted in agriculture . Even today, tilling the soil, growing fruit, and raising cattle are important to the local economy. Other jobs are to be found in small business and the service sector . There is a commercial area in Pensier. Until 1976, there was a boarding school at Barberêche (Institut Saint-Dominique). Over the last few decades, the village has developed itself into a wealthy agriculture community. Many of the residents nowadays are commuters who work in Fribourg.\n\nAs of 2010 [update] , Barberêche had an unemployment rate of 2%. As of 2008 [update] , there were 60 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 22 businesses involved in this sector. 8 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 5 businesses in this sector. 95 people were employed in the tertiary sector , with 15 businesses in this sector. There were 287 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which females made up 38.0% of the workforce.\n\nIn 2008 [update] the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 117. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 42, all of which were in agriculture. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 7 of which 3 or (42.9%) were in manufacturing and 1 was in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 68. In the tertiary sector; 17 or 25.0% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 8 or 11.8% were in a hotel or restaurant, 1 was in the information industry, 8 or 11.8% were technical professionals or scientists, 3 or 4.4% were in education and 9 or 13.2% were in health care. \n\nIn 2000 [update] , there were 55 workers who commuted into the municipality and 185 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 3.4 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 10.5% used public transportation to get to work, and 52.6% used a private car. \n\nFrom the 2000 census [update] , 404 or 73.3% were Roman Catholic , while 101 or 18.3% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church . Of the rest of the population, there were 2 members of an Orthodox church (or about 0.36% of the population), and there were 4 individuals (or about 0.73% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 6 (or about 1.09% of the population) who were Islamic . There was 1 person who was Hindu and 2 individuals who belonged to another church. 25 (or about 4.54% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist , and 8 individuals (or about 1.45% of the population) did not answer the question. \n\nIn Barberêche about 190 or (34.5%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education , and 93 or (16.9%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a Fachhochschule ). Of the 93 who completed tertiary schooling, 57.0% were Swiss men, 21.5% were Swiss women, 10.8% were non-Swiss men and 10.8% were non-Swiss women. \n\nThe Canton of Fribourg school system provides one year of non-obligatory Kindergarten , followed by six years of Primary school. This is followed by three years of obligatory lower Secondary school where the students are separated according to ability and aptitude. Following the lower Secondary students may attend a three- or four-year optional upper Secondary school. The upper Secondary school is divided into gymnasium (university preparatory) and vocational programs. After they finish the upper Secondary program, students may choose to attend a Tertiary school or continue their apprenticeship . \n\nDuring the 2010-11 school year, there were a total of 48 students attending 3 classes in Barberêche. A total of 99 students from the municipality attended any school, either in the municipality or outside of it. There were no kindergarten classes in the municipality, but 11 students attended kindergarten in a neighboring municipality. The municipality had 2 primary classes and 38 students. During the same year, there were no lower secondary classes in the municipality, but 18 students attended lower secondary school in a neighboring municipality. There were no upper Secondary classes or vocational classes, but there were 15 upper Secondary students and 14 upper Secondary vocational students who attended classes in another municipality. The municipality had no non-university Tertiary classes, but there was one specialized Tertiary student who attended classes in another municipality. \n\nAs of 2000 [update] , there were 37 students from Barberêche who attended schools outside the municipality. \n\nMost of the population (as of 2000 [update] ) speaks French (409 or 74.2%) as their first language, German is the second most common (120 or 21.8%) and Portuguese is the third (7 or 1.3%). There are 5 people who speak Italian . Until the 15th century, the local language was almost exclusively German. The French-speaking community slowly grew until in the 18th and 19th centuries, the village was bilingual. French has been the majority language in Barberêche since about 1860.\n\nThe municipality is well connected, even though it lies far from the main highways . The nearest expressway interchange , A12 ( Bern - Vevey ) lies about 5 km (3.1 mi) from the center of the municipality. On 23 August 1898, the railway line from Fribourg to Murten opened, with a station in Pensier. The village of Barberêche itself has no public transport connections.",
  "Actimel (known as DanActive in the United States and Canada ) is a probiotic yogurt -type drink produced by the French company Danone .\n\nActimel earned over €1.4 billion (US$1.8 billion) in retail sales in 2006. \n\nActimel was invented in the 1980s when the first steps to developing a fermented milk based on Lactobacillus casei were already taken.\n\nIt wasn’t until 1994 when it was commercially-launched in Belgium. The word Actimel was derived from the Dutch “Actieve melk” which translates simply as Active Milk.\n\nClaimed benefits range from reducing the incidence of diarrhea and rhinitis reduction for young children, to improvement of the immune function in adults and seniors and reduction of duration of winter infections for elderly. \n\nA 2007 study published by the British Medical Journal suggests that the product could help avoid antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and limit Clostridioides difficile infections in elderly patients.\n\nOn 23 January 2008, a proposed class action was filed in California , accusing Danone Co. Inc. of false advertising in their marketing of yogurt containing probiotic bacteria (Danactive & Activia), alleging that the claimed health benefits have never been proven. The company has denied this accusation. \n\nFoodwatch claims that Danone \"makes a mountain out of a molehill\" in suggesting that Actimel protects from cold and boosts health. Foodwatch believes that the company sells a commodity product as a niche product using branding. \n\nThe Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) is an independent regulator for advertisements, sales promotion and direct marketing in the UK. According to Spiegel Online one TV spot from Actimel was blocked by the ASA in 2006 and one in 2008. In the first case the ASA upheld a complaint that the advert misleadingly implied that children given Actimel would be prevented from catching bacterial infections. Meanwhile in the second case complaints about the use of the phrase \"Actimel is scientifically proven and you can see that proof for yourself on our website\" were upheld as only summaries of, or references to, these studies were present on the website and the full content was not available. A TV advert that stated that Actimel was \"scientifically-proven to help support your kids' defences\" was banned by the Advertising Standards Authority. \n\nAlexa Meyer, from the Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Vienna , Austria, comparing probiotic drinks and normal yogurt, found no significant difference in the effect of Actimel and normal yogurt with living bacteria. The nutritional researcher recommends getting enough sleep, washing hands often and eating a daily bowl of yogurt. She says this would activate more active germ-fighting white blood cells, enhancing the immune system, probably due to the presence of Lactobacillus bulgaricus , from any normal yogurt, which is half the price of Actimel. \n\nThe equivalence of yogurts is supported by Berthold Koletzko from the University of Munich , Metabolic Diseases and Nutrition. In case of diarrhoea, Koletzko advises parents to give their children yogurt with living bacteria. It does not necessarily need to be Actimel, but may also be other yogurts. A measurable health benefit linked to the presence of live Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii sp. Bulgaricus in yogurt was reported by Koletzko and colleagues in 2005. In this review Koletzko and colleagues say that it was clearly demonstrated that yogurt containing viable bacteria improves lactose digestion and eliminates symptoms of lactose intolerance , and clearly fulfill the current concept of probiotics. \n\nThe net \"all-cause\" effects of yogurts have also been questioned; its 6 September 2009 issue, Nature featured an article by Didier Raoult who claimed that \"probiotic-enriched\" yogurt beverages may have contributed to the increase in obesity over the past 20 years. \n\nIn 2007, a health claims regulation was put in place by the European Commission within the 27 countries of the European Union , and a similar regulation came into consideration at Health Canada . ",
  "Doo-wop (also spelled doowop and doo wop ) is a subgenre of rhythm and blues music that originated in African-American communities during the 1940s, mainly in the large cities of the United States, including New York, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Chicago, Baltimore, Newark, Detroit, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles. It features vocal group harmony that carries an engaging melodic line to a simple beat with little or no instrumentation . Lyrics are simple, usually about love, sung by a lead vocal over background vocals, and often featuring, in the bridge , a melodramatically heartfelt recitative addressed to the beloved. Harmonic singing of nonsense syllables (such as \"doo-wop\") is a common characteristic of these songs. Gaining popularity in the 1950s, doo-wop was commercially viable until the early 1960s and continued to influence performers in other genres.\n\nDoo-wop has complex musical, social, and commercial origins.\n\nDoo-wop's style is a mixture of precedents in composition, orchestration, and vocals that figured in American popular music created by songwriters and vocal groups, both black and white, from the 1930s to the 1940s.\n\nSuch composers as Rodgers and Hart (in their 1934 song \" Blue Moon \"), and Hoagy Carmichael and Frank Loesser (in their 1938 \" Heart and Soul \") used a I–vi–ii–V -loop chord progression in those hit songs ; composers of doo-wop songs varied this slightly but significantly to the chord progression I–vi–IV–V , so influential that it is sometimes referred to as the ' 50s progression . This characteristic harmonic layout was combined with the AABA chorus form typical for Tin Pan Alley songs. \n\nHit songs by black groups such as the Ink Spots (\" If I Didn't Care \", one of the best selling singles worldwide of all time, and \"Address Unknown\") and the Mills Brothers (\" Paper Doll \", \" You Always Hurt the One You Love \" and \"Glow Worm\") were generally slow songs in swing time with simple instrumentation. Doo-wop street singers generally performed without instrumentation, but made their musical style distinctive, whether using fast or slow tempos , by keeping time with a swing-like off-beat , while using the \"doo-wop\" syllables as a substitute for drums and a bass vocalist as a substitute for a bass instrument. \n\nDoo-wop's characteristic vocal style was influenced by groups such as the Mills Brothers, whose close four-part harmony derived from the vocal harmonies of the earlier barbershop quartet . \n\nThe Four Knights ' \"Take Me Right Back to the Track\" (1945), the Cats and the Fiddle 's song \"I Miss You So\" (1939), and the Triangle Quartette's even earlier record \"Doodlin' Back\" (1929) prefigured doo-wop's rhythm and blues sound long before doo-wop became popular.\n\nIn The Complete Book of Doo-Wop , co-authors Gribin and Schiff (who also wrote Doo-Wop, the Forgotten Third of Rock 'n' Roll ), identify five features of doo-wop music:\n\nWhile these features provide a helpful guide, they need not all be present in a given song for aficionados to consider it doo-wop, and the list does not include the aforementioned typical doo-wop chord progressions. Bill Kenny , lead singer of the Ink Spots, is often credited with introducing the \"top and bottom\" vocal arrangement featuring a high tenor singing the intro and a bass spoken chorus. The Mills Brothers, who were famous in part because in their vocals they sometimes mimicked instruments, were an additional influence on street vocal harmony groups, who, singing a cappella arrangements, used wordless onomatopoeia to mimic musical instruments. For instance, \" Count Every Star \" by the Ravens (1950) includes vocalizations imitating the \"doomph, doomph\" plucking of a double bass . The Orioles helped develop the doo-wop sound with their hits \" It's Too Soon to Know \" (1948) and \" Crying in the Chapel \" (1953).\n\nAlthough the musical style originated in the late 1940s and was very popular in the 1950s, the term \"doo-wop\" itself did not appear in print until 1961, when it was used in reference to the Marcels ' song, \"Blue Moon\", in The Chicago Defender , just as the style's vogue was nearing its end. Though the name was attributed to radio disc jockey Gus Gossert, he did not accept credit, stating that \"doo-wop\" was already in use in California to categorize the music. \n\n\"Doo-wop\" is itself a nonsense expression. In the Delta Rhythm Boys ' 1945 recording, \"Just A-Sittin' And A-Rockin\", it is heard in the backing vocal . It is heard later in the Clovers ' 1953 release \"Good Lovin'\" (Atlantic Records 1000), and in the chorus of Carlyle Dundee & the Dundees' 1954 song \"Never\" (Space Records 201). The first hit record with \"doo-wop\" being harmonized in the refrain was the Turbans ' 1955 hit, \"When You Dance\" (Herald Records H-458). The Rainbows embellished the phrase as \"do wop de wadda\" in their 1955 \"Mary Lee\" (on Red Robin Records ; also a Washington, D.C. regional hit on Pilgrim 703); and in their 1956 national hit, \" In the Still of the Night \", the Five Satins sang across the bridge with a plaintive \"doo-wop, doo-wah\". \n\nThe vocal harmony group tradition that developed in the United States after World War II was the most popular form of rhythm and blues music among black teenagers, especially those living in the large urban centers of the East Coast , in Chicago, and in Detroit. Among the first groups to perform songs in the vocal harmony group tradition were the Orioles , the Five Keys , and the Spaniels ; they specialized in romantic ballads that appealed to the sexual fantasies of teenagers in the late 1940s and early 1950s. The nonsense string of syllables, \"doo doo doo doo-wop\", from which the name of the genre was later derived, is used repeatedly in the song \"Just A Sittin' And A Rockin\", recorded by the Delta Rhythm Boys in December 1945. By the mid-1950s, vocal harmony groups had transformed the smooth delivery of ballads into a performance style incorporating the nonsense phrase as vocalized by the bass singers, who provided rhythmic movement for a cappella songs. Soon, other doo-wop groups entered the pop charts , particularly in 1955, which saw such cross-over doo-wop hits as \" Sincerely \" by the Moonglows , \" Earth Angel \" by the Penguins , the Cadillacs' \"Gloria\", the Heartbeats' \"A Thousand Miles Away\", Shep & the Limelites' \" Daddy's Home \", the Flamingos ' \"I Only Have Eyes for You\", and the Jive Five \" My True Story \". \n\nTeenagers who could not afford musical instruments formed groups that sang songs a cappella at high school dances and other social occasions. They rehearsed on street corners and apartment stoops, as well as under bridges, in high school washrooms, and in hallways and other places with echoes: these were the only spaces with suitable acoustics available to them. Thus they developed a form of group harmony based in the harmonies and emotive phrasing of black spirituals and gospel music. Doo-wop music allowed these youths not only a means of entertaining themselves and others, but also a way of expressing their values and worldviews in a repressive white-dominated society, often through the use of innuendo and hidden messages in the lyrics. \n\nParticularly productive doo-wop groups were formed by young Italian-American men who, like their black counterparts, lived in rough neighborhoods (e.g., the Bronx and Brooklyn), learned their basic musical craft singing in church, and would gain experience in the new style by singing on street corners. New York was the capital of Italian doo-wop, and all its boroughs were home to groups that made successful records. \n\nBy the late 1950s and early 1960s, many Italian-American groups had national hits: Dion and the Belmonts scored with \" I Wonder Why \", \" Teenager in Love \", and \" Where or When \"; the Capris made their name in 1960 with \" There's a Moon Out Tonight \"; Randy & the Rainbows , who charted with their Top 10 1963 single \"Denise\" . Other Italian-American doo-wop groups were the Earls , the Chimes , the Elegants , the Mystics , the Duprees , Johnny Maestro & the Crests , and the Regents .\n\nSome doo-wop groups were racially mixed. Puerto Rican Herman Santiago , originally slated to be the lead singer of the Teenagers , wrote the lyrics and the music for a song to be called \"Why Do Birds Sing So Gay?\", but whether because he was ill or because producer George Goldner thought that newcomer Frankie Lymon 's voice would be better in the lead, Santiago's original version was not recorded. To suit his tenor voice Lymon made a few alterations to the melody, and consequently the Teenagers recorded the song known as \" Why Do Fools Fall in Love? \". Racially integrated groups with both black and white performers included the Del-Vikings , who had major hits in 1957 with \" Come Go With Me \" and \" Whispering Bells \", the Crests, whose \" 16 Candles \" appeared in 1958, and the Impalas , whose \" Sorry (I Ran All the Way Home) \" was a hit in 1959. Chico Torres was a member of the Crests, whose lead singer, Johhny Mastrangelo, would later gain fame under the name Johnny Maestro. \n\nFemale doo-wop singers were much less common than males in the early days of doo-wop. Lillian Leach , lead singer of the Mellows from 1953 to 1958, helped pave the way for other women in doo-wop, soul and R&B . Margo Sylvia was the lead singer for the Tune Weavers . \n\nLike other urban centers in the US during the late 1940s and early 1950s, Baltimore developed its own vocal group tradition. The city produced rhythm and blues innovators such as the Cardinals , the Orioles , and the Swallows . The Royal Theatre in Baltimore and the Howard in Washington, D.C. were among the most prestigious venues for black performers on the so-called \" Chitlin Circuit \", which served as a school of the performing arts for blacks who had migrated from the deep South , and even more so for their offspring. In the late 1940s, the Orioles rose from the streets and made a profound impression on young chitlin' circuit audiences in Baltimore. The group, formed in 1947, sang simple ballads in rhythm and blues harmony, with the standard arrangement of a high tenor singing over the chords of the blended mid-range voices and a strong bass voice. Their lead singer, Sonny Til , had a soft, high-pitched tenor, and like the rest of the group, was still a teenager at the time. His style reflected the optimism of young black Americans in the postmigration era. The sound they helped develop, later called '\"doo-wop\", eventually became a \"sonic bridge\" to reach a white teen audience. \n\nIn 1948, Jubilee Records signed the Orioles to a contract, following which they appeared on Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scout radio show. The song they performed, \"It's Too Soon to Know\", often cited as the first doo-wop song, went to number 1 on Billboard' s \"Race Records\" chart, and number 13 on the pop charts, a crossover first for a black group. This was followed in 1953 by \"Crying in the Chapel\", their biggest hit, which went to number 1 on the R&B chart and number 11 on the pop chart. The Orioles were perhaps the first of the many doo-wop groups who named themselves after birds. \n\nThe sexual innuendo in the Orioles' songs was less disguised than in the vocal group music of the swing era. Their stage choreography was also more sexually explicit, and their songs were simpler and more emotionally direct. This new approach to sex in their performances did not target the white teen audience at first—when the Orioles took the stage, they were appealing directly to a young black audience, with Sonny Til using his entire body to convey the emotion in the lyrics of their songs. He became a teen sex symbol for black girls, who reacted by screaming and throwing pieces of clothing onto the stage when he sang. Other young male vocalists of the era took note and adjusted their own acts accordingly. The Orioles were soon displaced by newer groups who imitated these pioneers as a model for success. \n\nThe Swallows began in the late 1940s as a group of Baltimore teenagers calling themselves the Oakaleers. One of the members lived across the street from Sonny Til, who went on to lead the Orioles, and their success inspired the Oakaleers to rename themselves the Swallows. Their song \"Will You Be Mine\", released in 1951, reached number 9 on the US Billboard R&B chart. In 1952, the Swallows released \"Beside You\", their second national hit, which peaked at number 10 on the R&B chart. \n\nSome Baltimore doo-wop groups were connected with street gangs, and a few members were active in both scenes, such as Johnny Page of the Marylanders . As in all the major urban centers of the US, many of the teen gangs had their own street corner vocal groups in which they took great pride and which they supported fiercely. Competitive music and dance was a part of African American street culture, and with the success of some local groups, competition increased, leading to territorial rivalries among performers. Pennsylvania Avenue served as a boundary between East and West Baltimore, with the East producing the Swallows and the Cardinals and the Blentones , while the West was home to the Orioles and the Four Buddies . \n\nBaltimore vocal groups gathered at neighborhood record stores, where they practiced the latest hits in hopes that the store owners' connections with record companies and distributors might land them an audition. A King Records talent scout discovered the Swallows as they were rehearsing in Goldstick's record store. Sam Azrael's Super Music Store and Shaw's shoeshine parlor were also favored hangouts for Baltimore vocal groups; Jerry Wexler and Ahmet Ertegun auditioned the Cardinals at Azrael's. Some groups cut demos at local studios and played them for recording producers , with the aim of getting signed to a record deal. \n\nThe city of Chicago was outranked as a recording center in the United States only by New York City in the early years of the music recording industry . During the late 1940s and early 1950s, independent record labels gained control of the black record market from the major companies, and Chicago rose as one of the main centers for rhythm and blues music. This music was a vital source for the youth music called rock 'n' roll. In the mid-1950s, a number of rhythm and blues acts performing in the vocal ensemble style later known as doo-wop began to cross over from the R&B charts to mainstream rock 'n' roll. The Chicago record companies took note of this trend and scouted for vocal groups from the city that they could sign to their labels. The record labels , record distributors, and nightclub owners of Chicago all had a part in developing the vocal potential of the doo-wop groups, but Chicago doo-wop was \"created and nourished\" on the street corners of the city's lower-class neighborhoods. \n\nThe Chicago doo-wop groups, like those in New York, started singing on street corners and practiced their harmonies in tiled bathrooms, hallways, and subways; however, because they came originally from the deep South, the home of gospel and blues music, their doo-wop sound was more influenced by gospel and blues. \n\nVee-Jay Records and Chess Records were the main labels recording doo-wop groups in Chicago. Vee-Jay signed the Dells , the El Dorados , the Magnificents , and the Spaniels, all of whom achieved national chart hits in the mid-1950s. Chess signed the Moonglows, who had the most commercial success (seven Top 40 R&B hits, six of those Top Ten ) of the 1950s doo-wop groups, and the Flamingos, who had national hits as well. \n\nIn 1945, Joe Von Battle opened Joe's Record Shop at 3530 Hastings Street in Detroit; the store had the largest selection of rhythm and blues records in the city, according to a 1954 Billboard business survey. Battle, a migrant from Macon, Georgia, established his shop as the first black-owned business in the area, which remained primarily Jewish up to the late 1940s. Young aspiring performers would gather there in hopes of being discovered by the leading independent record company owners who courted Battle to promote and sell records, as well as to find new talent at his shop and studio. Battle's record labels included JVB, Von, Battle, Gone, and Viceroy; he also had subsidiary arrangements with labels such as King and Deluxe. He supplied Syd Nathan with many blues and doo-wop masters recorded in his primitive back-of-the-store studio from 1948 to 1954. As the pivotal recording mogul in the Detroit area, Battle was an important player in the independent label network. \n\nJack and Devora Brown, a Jewish couple, founded Fortune Records in 1946 and recorded a variety of eccentric artists and sounds; in the mid-1950s they became champions of Detroit rhythm and blues, including the music of local doo-wop groups. Fortune's premier act was the Diablos , featuring the soaring tenor of lead vocalist Nolan Strong, a native of Alabama. The group's most notable hit was \" The Wind \". Strong, like other R&B and doo-wop tenors of the time, was profoundly influenced by Clyde McPhatter , lead singer of the Dominoes and later of the Drifters. Strong himself made a lasting impression on the young Smokey Robinson , who went out of his way to attend Diablo shows. \n\nIn late 1957, 17-year-old Robinson, fronting a Detroit vocal harmony group called the Matadors, met the producer Berry Gordy , who was beginning to take up new styles, including doo-wop. Gordy wanted to promote a black style of music that would appeal to both the black and white markets, performed by black musicians with roots in gospel, R&B, or doo-wop. He sought artists who understood that the music had to be updated to appeal to a broader audience and attain greater commercial success. Early recordings by Gordy's Tamla Records , founded several months before he established the Motown Record Corporation in January 1959, were of either blues or doo-wop performances. \n\n\" Bad Girl \", a 1959 doo-wop single by Robinson's group, the Miracles , was the first single released (and the only one released by this group) on the Motown label—all previous singles from the company (and all those following from the group) were released on the Tamla label. Issued locally on the Motown Records label, it was licensed to and released nationally by Chess Records because the fledgling Motown Record Corporation did not, at that time, have national distribution. \"Bad Girl\" was the group's first national chart hit, reaching number 93 on the Billboard Hot 100. Written by Miracles lead singer Smokey Robinson and Motown Records' president Berry Gordy, \"Bad Girl\" was the first of several of the Miracles' songs performed in the doo-wop style during the late 1950s.\n\nDoo-wop groups also formed on the west coast of the United States, especially in California, where the scene was centered in Los Angeles. Independent record labels owned by black entrepreneurs such as Dootsie Williams and John Dolphin recorded these groups, most of which had formed in high schools. One such group, the Penguins, included Cleveland \"Cleve\" Duncan and Dexter Tisby, former classmates at Fremont High School in the Watts neighborhood of Los Angeles. They, along with Bruce Tate and Curtis Williams, recorded the song \"Earth Angel\" (produced by Dootsie Williams), which rose to number one on the R&B charts in 1954. \n\nMost of the Los Angeles doo-wop groups came out of the Fremont, Belmont , and Jefferson high schools. All of them were influenced by the Robins , a successful R&B group of the late 1940s and the 1950s who formed in San Francisco, or by other groups including the Flairs , the Flamingos (not the Chicago group) and the Hollywood Flames . Many other Los Angeles doo-wop groups of the time were recorded by Dootsie Williams' Dootone Records and by John Dolphin's Central Avenue record store, Dolphin's of Hollywood. These included the Calvanes, the Crescendos, the Cuff Linx, the Cubans, the Dootones, the Jaguars, the Jewels, the Meadowlarks , the Silks, the Squires, the Titans, and the Up-Fronts. A few groups, such as the Platters and Rex Middleton's Hi-Fis, had crossover success. \n\nThe Jaguars, from Fremont High School, was one of the first interracial vocal groups; it consisted of two African Americans, a Mexican American, and a Polish-Italian American. Doo-wop was popular with California Mexican Americans, who were attracted in the 1950s to its a capella vocals; the romantic style of the doo-wop groups appealed to them, as it was reminiscent of the traditional ballads and harmonies of Mexican folk music. \n\nIn 1960, Art Laboe released one of the first oldies compilations, Memories of El Monte , on his record label, Original Sound . The record was a collection of classic doo-wop songs by bands that used to play at the dances Laboe organized at Legion Stadium in El Monte, California , beginning in 1955. It included songs by local bands such as the Heartbeats and the Medallions . Laboe had become a celebrity in the Los Angeles area as a disc jockey for radio station KPOP , playing doo-wop and rhythm and blues broadcast from the parking lot of Scriverner's Drive-In on Sunset Boulevard . \n\nIn 1962, Frank Zappa , with his friend Ray Collins, wrote the doo-wop song \" Memories of El Monte \". This was one of the first songs written by Zappa, who had been listening to Laboe's compilation of doo-wop singles . Zappa took the song to Laboe, who recruited the lead vocalist of the Penguins, Cleve Duncan, for a new iteration of the group, recorded it, and released it as a single on his record label. \n\nEarly doo-wop music, dating from the late 1940s and early 1950s, was especially popular in the Northeast industrial corridor from New York to Philadelphia, and New York City was the world capital of doo-wop. There, African American groups such as the Ravens, the Drifters, the Dominoes, the Charts , and the so-called \"bird groups\", such as the Crows, the Sparrows, the Larks, and the Wrens , melded rhythm and blues with the gospel music they had grown up singing in church. Street singing was almost always a cappella ; instrumental accompaniment was added when the songs were recorded. The large numbers of blacks who had migrated to New York City as part of the Great Migration came mostly from Georgia, Florida, and the Carolinas. In the 1940s black youths in the city began to sing the rhythm and blues styling that came to be known as doo-wop. Many of these groups were found in Harlem . \n\nBlacks were forced by legal and social segregation, as well as by the constraints of the built environment , to live in certain parts of New York City of the early 1950s. They identified with their own wards, street blocks and streets. Being effectively locked out of mainstream white society increased their social cohesion and encouraged creativity within the context of African American culture. Young singers formed groups and rehearsed their songs in public spaces: on street corners, apartment stoops, and subway platforms, in bowling alleys, school bathrooms, and pool halls, as well as at playgrounds and under bridges. \n\nBobby Robinson , a native of South Carolina, was an independent record producer and songwriter in Harlem who helped popularize doo-wop music in the 1950s. He got into the music business in 1946 when he opened \"Bobby's Record Shop\" (later \"Bobby's Happy House\") on the corner of 125th Street and Eighth Avenue , near the Apollo Theater , a noted venue for African-American performers. The Apollo held talent contests in which audience members indicated their favorites with applause. These were a major outlet for doo-wop performers to be discovered by record company talent scouts. In 1951, Robinson started Robin Records, which later became Red Robin Records , and began recording doo-wop; he recorded the Ravens, the Mello-Moods, and many other doo-wop vocal groups. He used the tiny shop to launch a series of record labels which released many hits in the US. Robinson founded or co-founded Red Robin Records, Whirlin' Disc Records, Fury Records, Everlast Records, Fire Records and Enjoy Records. \n\nArthur Godfrey 's long-running (1946–1958) morning radio show on CBS, Talent Scouts , was a New York venue from which some doo-wop groups gained national exposure. In 1948, the Orioles, then known as the Vibra-Nairs, went to the city with Deborah Chessler , their manager and main songwriter, and appeared on the show. They won only third place, but Godfrey invited them back twice. Chessler leveraged a few demo recordings the group had cut, along with the recent radio exposure, to interest a distributor in marketing the group on an independent label. They cut six sides, one of which was a doo-wop ballad written by Chessler called \" It's Too Soon to Know \". It reached no. 1 on Billboard's national Most-Played Juke Box Race Records chart, and, in a first for a doo-wop song, the record crossed over to the mainstream pop chart, where it reached no. 13. \n\nThe Du Droppers formed in Harlem in 1952. Members of the band were experienced gospel singers in ensembles dating to the 1940s, and were one of the oldest groups to record during the era. Among the Du Droppers' most enduring songs are \"I Wanna Know\" and \"I Found Out (What You Do When You Go Round There)\", which both reached number three on the Billboard R&B charts in 1953.\n\nFrankie Lymon, lead vocalist of the Teenagers , was the first black teen idol who appealed to both black and white audiences. He was born in Harlem, where he began singing doo-wop songs with his friends on the streets. He joined a group, the Premiers, and helped members Herman Santiago and Jimmy Merchant rewrite a song they had composed to create \" Why Do Fools Fall In Love \", which won the group an audition with Gee Records . Santiago was too sick to sing lead on the day of the audition, consequently Lymon sang the lead on \"Why Do Fools Fall in Love\" instead, and the group was signed as the Teenagers with Lymon as lead singer. The song quickly charted as the number one R&B song in the United States and reached number six on the pop chart in 1956, becoming the number one pop hit in the United Kingdom as well. \n\nThe Willows , an influential street corner group from Harlem, were a model for many of the New York City doo-wop acts that rose after them. Their biggest hit was \" Church Bells May Ring \", featuring Neil Sedaka , then a member of the Linc-Tones , on chimes . It reached number 11 on the US R&B chart in 1956. \n\nAlthough they never had a national chart hit, the Solitaires , best known for their 1957 hit single \" Walking Along \", were one of the most popular vocal groups in New York in the late 1950s. \n\nThe heyday of the girl group era began in 1957 with the success of two teen groups from the Bronx, the Chantels and the Bobbettes . The six girls in the Bobettes, aged eleven to fifteen, wrote and recorded \"Mr. Lee\", a novelty tune about a schoolteacher that was a national hit. The Chantels were the second African-American girl group to enjoy nationwide success in the US. The group was established in the early 1950s by five students, all of them born in the Bronx, who attended the Catholic St. Anthony of Padua School in the Bronx , where they were trained to sing Gregorian Chants . Their first recording was \"He's Gone\" (1958), which made them the first pop rock girl group to chart. Their second single, \"Maybe\" hit the charts, No. 15 on Billboard ' s Hot 100. \n\nIn 1960, the Chiffons began as a trio of schoolmates at James Monroe High School in the Bronx . Judy Craig , fourteen years old, was the lead singer, singing with Patricia Bennett and Barbara Lee, both thirteen. In 1962, the girls met songwriter Ronnie Mack at the after-school center; Mack suggested they add Sylvia Peterson, who had sung with Little Jimmy & the Tops , to the group. The group was named the Chiffons when recording and releasing their first single, \" He's So Fine \". Written by Mack, it was released on the Laurie Records label in 1963. \"He's So Fine\" hit No. 1 in the US, selling over one million copies. \n\nPublic School 99, which sponsored evening talent shows, and Morris High School were centers of musical creativity in the Bronx during the doo-wop era. Arthur Crier, a leading figure in the doo-wop scene in the Morrissania neighborhood, was born in Harlem and raised in the Bronx; his mother was from North Carolina. Crier was a founding member of a doo-wop group called the Five Chimes, one of several different groups with that name, and sang bass with the Halos and the Mellows . Many years later he observed that there was a shift in the music sung on the streets from gospel to secular rhythm and blues between 1950 and 1952. \n\nNew York was also the capital of Italian doo-wop, and all its boroughs were home to groups that made successful records. The Crests were from the Lower East Side in Manhattan; Dion and the Belmonts, the Regents, and Nino and the Ebb Tides were from the Bronx; the Elegants from Staten Island; the Capris from Queens; the Mystics, the Neons, the Classics, and Vito & the Salutations from Brooklyn. \n\nAlthough Italians were a much smaller proportion of the Bronx's population in the 1950s than Jews and the Irish, only they had significant influence as rock 'n' roll singers. Young people of other ethnicities were listening to rock 'n' roll, but it was Italian Americans who established themselves in performing and recording the music. While relationships between Italian Americans and African Americans in the Bronx were sometimes fraught, there were many instances of collaboration between them. \n\nItalian Americans kept African Americans out of their neighborhoods with racial boundary policing and fought against them in turf wars and gang battles , yet they adopted the popular music of African Americans, treated it as their own, and were an appreciative audience for black doo-wop groups. Similarities in language idioms, masculine norms, and public comportment made it possible for African American and Italian American young men to mingle easily when societal expectations did not interfere. These cultural commonalities allowed Italian Americans to appreciate the singing of black doo-woppers in deterritorialized spaces, whether on the radio, on records, at live concerts, or in street performances. Dozens of neighborhood Italian groups formed, some of which recorded songs at Cousins Records, a record shop turned label, on Fordham Road. Italian American groups from the Bronx released a steady stream of doo-wop songs, including \"Teenager In Love\" and \"I Wonder Why\" by Dion and the Belmonts, and \"Barbara Ann\" by the Regents. Johnny Maestro, the Italian American lead singer of the interracial Bronx group the Crests, was the lead on the hit \" Sixteen Candles \". Maestro said that he became interested in R&B vocal group harmony listening to the Flamingos, the Harptones , and the Moonglows on Alan Freed 's radio show on WINS in New York. Freed's various radio and stage shows had a crucial role in creating a market for Italian doo-wop. \n\nYoung black singers in Philadelphia helped create the doo-wop vocal harmony style developing in the major cities of the US during the 1950s. Early doo-wop groups in the city included the Castelles , the Silhouettes , the Turbans, and Lee Andrews & the Hearts . They were recorded by small independent rhythm and blues record labels, and occasionally by more established labels in New York. Most of these groups had limited success, scoring only one or two hit songs on the R&B charts. They had frequent personnel changes and often moved from label to label hoping to achieve another hit. \n\nThe migration of blacks to Philadelphia from the southern states of the US, especially South Carolina and Virginia, had a profound effect not only on the city's demographics, but on its music and culture as well. During the Great Migration, the black population of Philadelphia increased to 250,000 by 1940. Hundreds of thousands of southern African Americans migrated to the metropolitan area , bringing their secular and religious folk music with them. After World War II, the black population of the metro grew to about 530,000 by 1960. \n\nBlack doo-wop groups had a major role in the evolution of rhythm and blues in early 1950s Philadelphia. Groups like the Castelles and the Turbans helped develop the music with their tight harmonies, lush ballads, and distinctive falsettos . Many of these vocal groups got together in secondary schools such as West Philadelphia High School , and performed at neighborhood recreation centers and teen dances. The Turbans, Philadelphia's first nationally charting R&B group, formed in 1953 when they were in their teens. They signed with Herald Records and recorded \"Let Me Show You (Around My Heart)\" with its B side, \"When We Dance\", in 1955. \"When We Dance\" became a national hit,\nrising to no. 3 on the R&B charts and reaching the Top 40 on the pop charts. \n\nThe Silhouettes' crossover hit \" Get a Job \", released in 1957, reached number one on the pop and R&B charts in February 1958, while Lee Andrews & the Hearts had hits in 1957 and 1958 with \"Teardrops\", \" Long Lonely Nights \", and \"Try the Impossible\". \n\nKae Williams , a Philadelphia deejay, record label owner and producer, managed the doo-wop groups Lee Andrews & the Hearts, the Sensations , who sold nearly a million records in 1961 with the song \" Let Me In \", and the Silhouettes , who had a number 1 hit in 1958 with \"Get a Job\". After the nationally distributed Ember label acquired the rights to \"Get a Job\", Dick Clark began to play it on American Bandstand , and subsequently it sold over a million copies, topping the Billboard R&B singles chart and pop singles chart. \n\nAlthough American Bandstand' s programming came to rely on the musical creations of black performers, the show marginalized black teens with exclusionary admissions policies until it moved to Los Angeles in 1964. Featuring young whites dancing to music popularized by local deejays Georgie Woods and Mitch Thomas, with steps created by their black teenage listeners, Bandstand presented to its national audience an image of youth culture that erased the presence of black teenagers in Philadelphia's youth music scene. \n\nBroadcast from a warehouse on 46th and Market Street in West Philadelphia, most of American Bandstand' s young dancers were Italian Americans who attended a nearby Catholic high school in South Philadelphia. Like the rest of the entertainment industry, American Bandstand camouflaged the intrinsic blackness of the music in response to a national moral panic over rock 'n' roll's popularity with white teenagers, and the show's Italian American dancers and performers were deethnicized as \"nice white kids\", their Italian American youth identity submerged in whiteness. \n\nDick Clark kept track of the national music scene through promoters and popular disc jockeys. In Philadelphia, he listened to Hy Lit , the lone white deejay at WHAT , and African American disc jockeys Georgie Woods and Douglas \"Jocko\" Henderson on WDAS . These were Philadelphia's two major black radio stations; they were black-oriented, but white-owned. \n\nThe program director of WHAT, Charlie O'Donnell, hired Lit, who was Jewish, to deejay on the station in 1955, and Lit's career was launched. From there he went to WRCV and then around 1956 to WIBG , where over 70 percent of the radio audience in the listening area tuned in to his 6–10 p.m. program. \n\nCameo Records and Parkway Records were major record labels based in Philadelphia from 1956 (Cameo) and 1958 (Parkway) to 1967 that released doo-wop records. In 1957, small Philadelphia record label XYZ had recorded \" Silhouettes \", a song by local group the Rays, which Cameo picked up for national distribution. It eventually reached number 3 on both the R&B Best Sellers chart and Billboard Top 100, and also reached the top five on both the sales and airplay charts. It was the group's only top 40 hit.\n\nSeveral white Philadelphia doo-wop groups also had chart-toppers ; the Capris had a regional hit with \" God Only Knows \" in 1954. In 1958, Danny & the Juniors had a number-one hit with \" At the Hop \" and their song \"Rock and Roll Is Here to Stay\" reached the top twenty. In 1961, the Dovells reached the number two spot with \" Bristol Stomp \", about teenagers in Bristol, Pennsylvania who were dancing a new step called \"The Stomp\". \n\nJerry Blavat , a half-Jewish, half-Italian, popular deejay on Philadelphia radio, built his career hosting dances and live shows and gained a devoted local following.\nHe soon had his own independent radio show, on which he introduced many doo-wop acts in the 1960s to a wide audience, including the Four Seasons , an Italian American group from Newark, New Jersey. \n\nThe history of modern Jamaican music is relatively short. A sudden shift in its style began in the early 1950s with the importing of American rhythm and blues records to the island and the new availability of affordable transistor radios. Listeners whose tastes had been neglected by the lone Jamaican station at the time, RJR (Real Jamaican Radio), tuned into the R&B music being broadcast on the powerful nighttime signals of American AM radio stations, especially WLAC in Nashville, WNOE in New Orleans, and WINZ in Miami. On these stations Jamaicans could hear the likes of Fats Domino and doo-wop vocal groups. \n\nJamaicans who worked as migrant agricultural workers in the southern US returned with R&B records, which sparked an active dance scene in Kingston . In the late 1940s and early 1950s, many working-class Jamaicans who could not afford radios attended sound system dances, large outdoor dances featuring a deejay ( selector ) and his selection of records. Enterprising deejays used mobile sound systems to create impromptu street parties. These developments were the principal means by which new American R&B records were introduced to a mass Jamaican audience. \n\nThe opening by Ken Khouri of Federal Studios, Jamaica's first recording facility, in 1954, marked the beginning of a prolific recording industry and a thriving rhythm and blues scene in Jamaica. In 1957, American performers including Rosco Gordon and the Platters performed in Kingston. In late August 1957, the doo-wop group Lewis Lymon and the Teenchords arrived in Kingston as part of the \"Rock-a-rama\" rhythm and blues troupe for two days of shows at the Carib Theatre. The Four Coins , a Greek American doo-wop group from Pittsburgh, did a show in Kingston in 1958. \n\nLike their American exemplars, many Jamaican vocalists began their careers by practicing harmonies in groups on street corners, before moving on to the talent contest circuit that was the proving ground for new talent in the days before the rise of the first sound systems. \n\nIn 1959, while he was a student at Kingston College , Dobby Dobson wrote the doo-wop song \"Cry a Little Cry\" in honor of his shapely biology teacher, and recruited a group of his schoolmates to back him on a recording of the song under the name Dobby Dobson and the Deltas on the Tip-Top label. It climbed to number one on the RJR charts, where it spent some six weeks. \n\nThe harmonizing of the American doo-wop groups the Drifters and the Impressions served as a vocal model for a newly formed (1963) group, the Wailers , in which Bob Marley sang lead while Bunny Wailer sang high harmony and Peter Tosh sang low harmony. The Wailers recorded an homage to doo-wop in 1965 with their version of Dion and the Belmonts' \" A Teenager in Love \". Bunny Wailer cited Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, the Platters, and the Drifters as early influences on the group. The Wailers covered Harvey and the Moonglows' 1958 doo-wop hit, \"Ten Commandments of Love\", on their debut album, Wailing Wailers , released in late 1965. The same year, the Wailers cut the doo-wop song \"Lonesome Feelings\", with \"There She Goes\" on the B-side , as a single produced by Coxsone Dodd . \n\nThe synthesis of music styles that evolved into what is now called rhythm and blues, previously labeled \"race music\" by the record companies, found a broad youth audience in the postwar years and helped to catalyze changes in racial relations in American society. By 1948, RCA Victor was marketing black music under the name \"Blues and Rhythm\". In 1949, Jerry Wexler , a reporter for Billboard magazine at the time, reversed the words and coined the name \"Rhythm and Blues\" to replace the term \"Race Music\" for the magazine's black music chart. \n\nOne style of rhythm and blues was mostly vocal, with instrumental backing that ranged from a full orchestra to none. It was most often performed by a group, frequently a quartet, as in the black gospel tradition; utilizing close harmonies, this style was nearly always performed in a slow to medium tempo. The lead voice, usually one in the upper register, often sang over the driving, wordless chords of the other singers or interacted with them in a call-and-response exchange. Vocal harmony groups such as the Ink Spots embodied this style, the direct antecedent of doo-wop, which rose from inner city street corners in the mid-1950s and ranked high on the popular music charts between 1955 and 1959. \n\nBlack and white young people both wanted to see popular doo-wop acts perform, and racially mixed groups of youths would stand on inner city street corners and sing doo-wop songs a capella . This angered white supremacists, who considered rhythm and blues and rock and roll a danger to America's youth. \n\nThe development of rhythm and blues coincided with the issue of racial segregation becoming more socially contentious in American society, while the black leadership increasingly challenged the old social order. The white power structure in American society and some executives in the corporately controlled entertainment industry saw rhythm and blues, rooted in black culture, as obscene, and considered it a threat to white youth, among whom the genre was becoming increasingly popular. \n\nJewish composers, musicians, and promoters had a prominent role in the transition to doo-wop and rock 'n' roll from jazz and swing in American popular music of the 1950s, while Jewish businessmen founded many of the labels that recorded rhythm and blues during the height of the vocal group era. \n\nIn the decade from 1944 to 1955, many of the most influential record companies specializing in \"race\" music—or \"rhythm and blues\", as it later came to be known—were owned or co-owned by Jews. It was the small independent record companies that recorded, marketed, and distributed doo-wop music. For example, Jack and Devora Brown, a Jewish couple in Detroit, founded Fortune Records in 1946, and recorded a variety of eccentric artists and sounds; in the mid-1950s they became champions of Detroit rhythm and blues, including the music of local doo-wop groups. \n\nA few other Jewish women were in the recording business, such as Florence Greenberg , who started the Scepter label in 1959, and signed the African American girl group, the Shirelles . The songwriting team of Goffin and King , who worked for Don Kirshner's Aldon music at 1650 Broadway (near the famed Brill Building at 1619), offered Greenberg a song, \" Will You Love Me Tomorrow \", which was recorded by the Shirelles and rose to number 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in 1961. During the early 1960s, Scepter was the most successful independent record label. \n\nDeborah Chessler, a young Jewish sales clerk interested in black music, became the manager and songwriter for the Baltimore doo-wop group the Orioles. They recorded her song \"It's Too Soon to Know\" and it reached no. 1 on Billboard ' s race records charts in November 1948. \n\nSome record company owners such as Herman Lubinsky had a reputation for exploiting black artists. Lubinsky, who founded Savoy Records in 1942, produced and recorded the Carnations, the Debutantes, the Falcons , the Jive Bombers , the Robins, and many others. Although his entrepreneurial approach to the music business and his role as a middleman between black artists and white audiences created opportunities for unrecorded groups to pursue wider exposure, he was reviled by many of the black musicians he dealt with. Historians Robert Cherry and Jennifer Griffith maintain that regardless of Lubinsky's personal shortcomings, the evidence that he treated African American artists worse in his business dealings than other independent label owners did is unconvincing. They contend that in the extremely competitive independent record company business during the postwar era, the practices of Jewish record owners generally were more a reflection of changing economic realities in the industry than of their personal attitudes. \n\nNew York rockers Lou Reed , Joey and Tommy Ramone , and Chris Stein were doo-wop fans, as were many other Jewish punks and proto-punks . Reed recorded his first lead vocals in 1962 on two doo-wop songs, \"Merry Go Round\" and \"Your Love\", which were not released at the time. A few years later, Reed worked as a staff songwriter writing bubblegum and doo-wop songs in the assembly-line operation at Pickwick Records in New York. \n\nThe R&B and doo-wop music that informed early rock 'n' roll was racially appropriated in the 1970s just as blues-based rock had been in the 1950s and 1960s. Generic terms such as \"Brill Building music\" obscure the roles of the black producers, writers, and groups like the Marvelettes and the Supremes , who were performing similar music and creating hits for the Motown label, but were categorized as soul. According to ethnomusicologist Evan Rapport, before 1958 more than ninety percent of doo-wop performers were African-American, but the situation changed as large numbers of white groups began to enter the performance arena. \n\nThis music was embraced by punk rockers in the 1970s, as part of a larger societal trend among white people in the US of romanticizing it as music that belonged to a simpler (in their eyes) time of racial harmony before the social upheaval of the 1960s. White Americans had a nostalgic fascination with the 1950s and early 1960s that entered mainstream culture beginning in 1969 when Gus Gossert started to broadcast early rock and roll and doo-wop songs on New York's WCBS-FM radio station. This trend reached its peak in racially segregated commercial productions such as American Graffiti , Happy Days , and Grease , which was double-billed with the Ramones ' B-movie feature Rock 'n' Roll High School in 1979. \n\nEarly punk rock adaptations of the 12-bar aab pattern associated with California surf or beach music, done within eight-, sixteen-, and twenty-four bar forms, were made by bands such as the Ramones, either as covers or as original compositions. Employing stylistic conventions of 1950s and 1960s doowop and rock and roll to signify the period referenced, some punk bands used call-and-response background vocals and doo-wop style vocables in songs, with subject matter following the example set by rock and roll and doo-wop groups of that era: teenage romance, cars, and dancing. Early punk rockers sometimes portrayed these nostalgic 1950s tropes with irony and sarcasm according to their own lived experiences, but they still indulged the fantasies evoked by the images. \n\nBy 1963 and 1964, proto-punk rocker Lou Reed was working the college circuit, leading bands that played covers of three-chord hits by pop groups and \"anything from New York with a classic doo-wop feel and a street attitude\". \n\nJonathan Richman , founder of the influential proto-punk band the Modern Lovers , cut the album Rockin' and Romance (1985) with acoustic guitar and doo-wop harmonies. His song \"Down in Bermuda\" for example, was directly influenced by \"Down in Cuba\" by the Royal Holidays. His album Modern Lovers 88 (1987), with doo-wop stylings and Bo Diddley rhythms, was recorded in acoustic trio format. \n\nDoo-wop groups achieved 1951 R&B chart hits with songs such as \" Sixty Minute Man \" by Billy Ward and His Dominoes , \"Where Are You?\" by the Mello-Moods , \" The Glory of Love \" by the Five Keys , and \"Shouldn't I Know\" by the Cardinals .\n\nDoo-wop groups played a significant role in ushering in the rock and roll era when two big rhythm and blues hits by vocal harmony groups, \" Gee \" by the Crows , and \" Sh-Boom \" by the Chords , crossed over onto the pop music charts in 1954. \"Sh-Boom\" is considered to have been the first rhythm-and-blues record to break into the top ten on the Billboard charts, reaching number 5; a few months later, a white group from Canada, the Crew Cuts , released their cover of the song, which reached number 1 and remained there for nine weeks. This was followed by several other white artists covering doo-wop songs performed by black artists, all of which scored higher on the Billboard charts than did the originals. These include \" Hearts of Stone \" by the Fontaine Sisters (number 1), \" At My Front Door \" by Pat Boone (number 7), \" Sincerely \" by the McGuire Sisters (number 1), and \" Little Darlin' \" by the Diamonds (number 2). Music historian Billy Vera points out that these recordings are not considered to be doo-wop. \n\n\" Only You \" was released in June 1955 by pop group the Platters . That same year the Platters had a number one pop chart hit with \" The Great Pretender \", released on 3 November. In 1956, Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers appeared on the Frankie Laine show in New York, which was televised nationally, performing their hit \" Why Do Fools Fall in Love? \". Frankie Laine referred to it as \"rock and roll\"; Lymon's extreme youth appealed to a young and enthusiastic audience. His string of hits included: \" I Promise to Remember \", \" The ABC's of Love \" and \" I'm Not a Juvenile Delinquent \".\n\nUp tempo doo-wop groups such as the Monotones \", the Silhouettes , and the Marcels had hits that charted on Billboard. All-white doo-wop groups would appear and also produce hits: The Mello-Kings in 1957 with \"Tonight, Tonight\", the Diamonds in 1957 with the chart-topping cover song \"Little Darlin'\" (original song by an African American group), the Skyliners in 1959 with \" Since I Don't Have You \", the Tokens in 1961 with \"The Lion Sleeps Tonight\".\n\nThe peak of doo-wop might have been in the late 1950s; in the early 1960s the most notable hits were Dion's \" Runaround Sue \", \" The Wanderer \", \" Lovers Who Wander \" and \" Ruby Baby \" and the Marcels ' \" Blue Moon \". There was a revival of the nonsense syllable form of doo-wop in the early 1960s, with popular records by the Marcels , the Rivingtons , and Vito & the Salutations. The genre reached the self-referential stage, with songs about the singers (\"Mr. Bass Man\" by Johnny Cymbal ) and the songwriters (\" Who Put the Bomp? \" by Barry Mann ), in 1961.\n\nOther pop R&B groups, including the Coasters , the Drifters , the Midnighters , and the Platters , helped link the doo-wop style to the mainstream, and to the future sound of soul music . The style's influence is heard in the music of the Miracles , particularly in their early hits such as \"Got A Job\" (an answer song to \" Get a Job \"), \" Bad Girl \", \" Who's Loving You \", \" (You Can) Depend on Me \", and \" Ooo Baby Baby \". Doo-wop was a precursor to many of the African-American musical styles seen today. Having evolved from pop , jazz and blues , doo-wop influenced many of the major rock and roll groups that defined the latter decades of the 20th century, and laid the foundation for many later musical innovations.\n\nDoo-wop's influence continued in soul, pop, and rock groups of the 1960s, including the Four Seasons , girl groups , and vocal surf music performers such as the Beach Boys . In the Beach Boys' case, doo-wop influence is evident in the chord progression used on part of their early hit \" Surfer Girl \". The Beach Boys later acknowledged their debt to doo-wop by covering the Regents ' 1961 number 7 hit, \" Barbara Ann \" with their number 2 cover of the song in 1966. In 1984, Billy Joel released \" The Longest Time \", a clear tribute to doo-wop music. \n\nAlthough the ultimate longevity of doo-wop has been disputed, the genre saw revivals at various times from the 1970s through the 1990s; the artists reviving the scene were concentrated in urban areas, mainly in New York City, Chicago, Philadelphia, Newark , and Los Angeles. Revival television shows and boxed CD sets such as the \"Doo Wop Box\" set 1–3 have rekindled interest in the music, the artists, and their stories.\n\nCruising with Ruben & the Jets , released in late 1968, is a concept album of doo-wop music recorded by Frank Zappa and the Mothers of Invention performing as a fictitious Chicano doo-wop band called Ruben & the Jets. In collaboration with Zappa, singer Ruben Guevara went on to start a real band called Ruben and the Jets . An early notable revival of \"pure\" doo-wop occurred when Sha Na Na appeared at the Woodstock Festival . Soul group the Trammps recorded \" Zing! Went the Strings of My Heart \" in 1972.\n\nOver the years other groups have had doo-wop or doo-wop-influenced hits, such as Robert John 's 1972 version of \" The Lion Sleeps Tonight \", Darts successful revival of the doo-wop standards \" Daddy Cool \" and \" Come Back My Love \" in the late 1970s, Toby Beau 's 1978 hit \"My Angel Baby\", and Billy Joel 's 1984 hit \" The Longest Time \". Soul and funk bands such as Zapp released the single (\" Doo Wa Ditty (Blow That Thing)/A Touch of Jazz (Playin' Kinda Ruff Part II) \"). The last doo-wop record to reach the top ten on the U.S. pop charts was \"It's Alright\" by Huey Lewis and the News , a doo-wop adaptation of the Impressions ' 1963 Top 5 smash hit . It reached number 7 on the U.S. Billboard Adult contemporary chart in June 1993. Much of the album had a doo-wop flavor. Another song from the By the Way sessions to feature a doo-wop influence was a cover of \"Teenager In Love\", originally recorded by Dion and the Belmonts . The genre would see another resurgence in popularity in 2018, with the release of the album \"Love in the Wind\" by Brooklyn-based band, the Sha La Das, produced by Thomas Brenneck for the Daptone Record label.\n\nDoo-wop is popular among barbershoppers and collegiate a cappella groups due to its easy adaptation to an all-vocal form. Doo-wop experienced a resurgence in popularity at the turn of the 21st century with the airing of PBS's doo-wop concert programs: Doo Wop 50 , Doo Wop 51 , and Rock, Rhythm, and Doo Wop . These programs brought back, live on stage, some of the better known doo-wop groups of the past. These programs were organized by Herman Lubinsky's grandson TJ Lubinsky . In addition to the Earth Angels , doo-wop acts in vogue in the second decade of the 2000s range from the Four Quarters to Street Corner Renaissance. Bruno Mars and Meghan Trainor are two examples of current artists who incorporate doo-wop music into their records and live performances. Mars says he has \"a special place in [his] heart for old-school music\". \n\nThe Broadway musical Jersey Boys spawned two touring doo-wop groups featuring former members of the show's casts: The Midtown Men featuring the Broadway cast, and Under the Streetlamp featuring the Chicago and touring cast. The musical was based on the Four Seasons' real-life rise from streetcorner doo-wop singers, under the influential arrangement work of Nick Massi , to the pop-rock band that went on to international fame.\n\nThe formation of the hip-hop scene beginning in the late 1970s strongly parallels the rise of the doo-wop scene of the 1950s, particularly mirroring it in the emergence of the urban street culture of the 1990s. According to Bobby Robinson, a well-known producer of the period:\n\nDoo-wop originally started out as the black teenage expression of the '50s and rap emerged as the black teenage ghetto expression of the '70s. Same identical thing that started it – the doowop groups down the street, in hallways, in alleys and on the corner. They'd gather anywhere and, you know, doo-wop doowah da dadada. You'd hear it everywhere. So the same thing started with rap groups around '76 or so. All of a sudden, everywhere you turned you'd hear kids rapping. In the summertime, they'd have these little parties in the park. They used to go out and play at night and kids would be out there dancing. All of a sudden, all you could hear was, hip hop hit the top don't stop. It's kids – to a great extent mixed-up and confused – reaching out to express themselves. They were forcefully trying to express themselves and they made up in fantasy what they missed in reality. ",
  "Freshwater fish are fish species that spend some or all of their lives in bodies of fresh water such as rivers , lakes , ponds and inland wetlands , where the salinity is less than 1.05%. These environments differ from marine habitats in many ways, especially the difference in levels of osmolarity . To survive in fresh water, fish need a range of physiological adaptations .\n\n41.24% of all known species of fish are found in fresh water. This is primarily due to the rapid speciation that the scattered habitats make possible. When dealing with ponds and lakes, one might use the same basic models of speciation as when studying island biogeography .\n\nFreshwater fish differ physiologically from saltwater fish in several respects. Their gills must be able to diffuse dissolved gases while keeping the electrolytes in the body fluids inside. Their scales reduce water diffusion through the skin : freshwater fish that have suffered too much scale loss will die. They also have well-developed kidneys to reclaim salts from body fluids before excretion .\n\nMany species of fish do reproduce in freshwater, but spend most of their adult lives in the sea. These are known as anadromous fish, and include, for instance, salmon , trout , sea lamprey and three-spined stickleback . Some other kinds of fish are, on the contrary, born in salt water, but live most of or parts of their adult lives in fresh water; for instance the eels . These are known as catadromous fish . \n\nSpecies migrating between marine and fresh waters need adaptations for both environments; when in salt water they need to keep the bodily salt concentration on a level lower than the surroundings, and vice versa. Many species solve this problem by associating different habitats with different stages of life. Both eels, anadromous salmoniform fish and the sea lamprey have different tolerances in salinity in different stages of their lives.\n\nFreshwater fish are traditionally divided into two divisions proposed by George S. Myers in 1938: \n\nA third group, peripheral freshwater fish, are fish which normally live in marine water but may enter and survive for some time in freshwater. This concept was introduced by John Treadwell Nichols in 1928. \n\nAmong fishers in the United States, freshwater fish species are usually classified by the water temperature in which they survive. The water temperature affects the amount of oxygen available as cold water contains more oxygen than warm water. \n\nIn 2021, a group of conservation organizations estimated that one-third of the world's freshwater fish species were at risk of extinction. A global assessment of freshwater fishes estimates an average decline of 83% in populations between 1970 and 2014. The protection of 30% of Earth's surfaces by 2030 may encompass freshwater habitat and help protect these threatened species. \n\nThere is an increasing trend in freshwater fish for local taxonomic, functional, and phylogenetic richness in more than half of the world's rivers. This increase in local diversity is primarily explained by anthropogenic species introductions that compensate for or even exceed extinctions in most rivers. \n\nA study and an interactive map by EWG using its results show freshwater fish in the U.S. [ globalize ] ubiquitously contain high levels of harmful PFAS , with a single serving typically significantly increasing the blood PFOS level. \n\nAbout four in ten North American freshwater fish are endangered, according to a pan-North American study, the main cause being human pollution. The number of fish species and subspecies to become endangered has risen from 40 to 61, since 1989. For example, the Bigmouth Buffalo is now the oldest age-validated freshwater fish in the world, and its status urgently needs reevaluation in parts of its endemic range. \n\nAbout 2 ⁄ 3 of the total freshwater fisheries in China are in the Yangtze Basin. Many Yangtze fish species have declined drastically and 65 were recognized as threatened in the 2009 Chinese red list . The Chinese paddlefish , once common to the Yangtze River, is one of a number of extinctions to have taken place due to the degradation of the Yangtze, alongside that of the wild Yangtze sturgeon .\n\nIntentional anthropogenic reconstruction and rerouting of waterways impacts stream flow, water temperature, and more, impacting normal habitat functionality. Dams not only interrupt linear water flow and cause major geological channel shifts, but also limit the amount of water available to fishes in lakes, streams and rivers and have the potential to change the trophic structure because of these alterations of the habitat and the limitations to movement and connectivity. \n\nUnnatural water flow below dams causes immense habitat degradation, reducing viable options for aquatic organisms. Upstream migration is hindered by the dam structure and can cause population declines as fishes don't have access to normal feeding and/or spawning grounds. Dams tend to affect upstream species richness, that is, the number of fish species in the ecological community. Additionally, dams can cause the isolation of fish populations, and the lack of connectivity creates possible problems for inbreeding and low genetic diversity. The loss of connectivity impacts the structure of community assemblies and increases the fragmentation of habitats, which can compound existing problems for vulnerable species. \n\nTemperature alterations are another unintended consequence of dam and land use projects. Temperature is a vital part of aquatic ecosystem stability, so changes to stream and river water temperature can have large impacts on biotic communities. Many aquatic larvae use thermal cues to regulate their life cycles, mostly notably here, insects. Insects are a large part of most fish diets, so this can pose a great dietary problem. Temperature can cause changes in fish behavior and distribution habits as well by increasing their metabolic rates and thus their drive to spawn and feed. \n\nLinear systems are more easily fragmented and connectivity in aquatic ecosystems is vital. Freshwater fishes are particularly vulnerable to habitat destruction because they reside in small bodies of water which are often very close to human activity and thus easily polluted by trash, chemicals, waste, and other agents which are harmful to freshwater habitats.\n\nLand use changes cause major shifts in aquatic ecosystems. Deforestation can change the structure and sedimentary composition of streams, which impacts the habitat functionality for many fish species and can reduce species richness, evenness, and diversity. Agriculture, mining, and basic infrastructural building can degrade freshwater habitats. Fertilizer runoffs can create excess nitrogen and phosphorus which feed massive algae blooms that block sunlight, limit water oxygenation, and make the habitat functionally unsustainable for aquatic species. Chemicals from mining and factories make their way into the soil and go into streams via runoff. More runoff makes its way into streams since paved roads, cement, and other basic infrastructure do not absorb materials, and all the harmful pollutants go directly into rivers and streams. Fish are very sensitive to changes in water pH, salinity, hardness, and temperature which can all be affected by runoff pollutants and indirect changes from land use. Freshwater fish face extinction due to habitat loss, overfishing, and \" forever chemicals .\" Conservation efforts, sustainable practices, and awareness are crucial in maintaining fish populations and species diversity.\n\nAn exotic (or non-native) species is defined as a species that does not naturally occur in a certain area or ecosystem. This includes eggs and other biological material associated with the species. Non-native species are considered invasive if they cause ecological or economic injury. \n\nThe introduction of exotic fish species into ecosystems is a threat to many endemic populations. The native species struggle to survive alongside exotic species which decimate prey populations or outcompete indigenous fishes. High densities of exotic fish are negatively correlated with native species richness. Because the exotic species is suddenly introduced to a community, it does not have any established predators or prey. The exotic species then have a survival advantage over endemic organisms.\n\nOne such example is the destruction of the endemic cichlid population in Lake Victoria via the introduction of the predatory Nile perch ( Lates niloticus ). Although the exact time is unknown, in the 1950s the Ugandan Game and Fisheries Department covertly introduced the Nile perch into Lake Victoria, possibly to improve sport fishing and boost the fishery. In the 1980s, the Nile perch population saw a large increase which coincided with a great increase in the value of the fishery. This surge in Nile perch numbers restructured the lake's ecology. The endemic cichlid population, known to have around 500 species, was cut almost in half. By the 1990s, only three species of sport fish were left to support the once multispecies fishery, two of which were invasive. More recent research has suggested that remaining cichlids are recovering due to the recent surge in Nile perch commercial fishing, and the cichlids that are left have the greatest phenotypic plasticity and are able to react to environmental changes quickly. \n\nThe introduction of the rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) in the late 19th century resulted in the extinction of the yellowfin cutthroat trout ( Oncorhynchus clarkii macdonaldi ) found only in the Twin Lakes of Colorado, USA. The yellowfin cutthroat trout was discovered in 1889 and was recognized as a subspecies of the cutthroat trout ( Oncorhynchus clarkii ). The rainbow trout was introduced to Colorado in the 1880s. By 1903, the yellowfin cutthroat trout stopped being reported. It is now presumed extinct. The rainbow trout is invasive worldwide, and there are multiple efforts to remove them from their non-native ecosystems.\n\nBoth species are among the \" 100 of the World’s Worst Invasive Alien Species ,\" as determined by the IUCN Invasive Species Specialist Group based on their effect on anthropogenic activities, environmental biodiversity and their ability to act as a case study for important ecological issues.\n\nHybridization involves the mating of two genetically different species ( interspecific hybridization ). It is dangerous for native species to hybridize because hybrid phenotypes may have better fitness and outcompete the two parent species and/or other fishes in the ecosystem. This could irreversibly compromise the genetic identity of one or both of the parent species and even drive them to extinction if their range is limited.\n\nThe rainbow trout discussed above hybridized with the native greenback cutthroat trout ( Oncorhynchus clarkii stomias ), causing their local extinction in the Twin Lakes area of Colorado as their hybrid \" cutbows \" became more prevalent. The rainbow trout has been reported to hybridize with at least two other salmonid species. Additionally, the cichlids in Lake Victoria evolved over 700 unique species in only 150,000 years and are theorized to have done so via ancient hybridization events which led to speciation. ",
  "A bassist (also known as a bass player or bass guitarist ) is a musician who plays a bass instrument such as a double bass (upright bass, contrabass, wood bass), bass guitar (electric bass, acoustic bass), keyboard bass (synth bass) or a low brass instrument such as a tuba or trombone . Many musical genres tend to be associated with at least one or more of these instruments.\n\nSince the 1960s, the electric bass has been the standard bass instrument for funk , R&B , soul , rock , reggae , jazz fusion , heavy metal , country and pop . The double bass is the standard bass instrument for classical music , bluegrass , rockabilly , and most genres of jazz . Low brass instruments such as the tuba or sousaphone are the standard bass instrument in Dixieland and New Orleans-style jazz bands. Tuba players are sometimes conflated with bassists, due to the instrument being used to double a part for the double bass in early music recordings. Tubists who tend to fill the role of a bassist include Howard Johnson , Herbie Flowers and Steve Brown among others. \n\nDespite the associations of different bass instruments with certain genres, there are exceptions. Some rock bands and bassists used a double bass, such as Lee Rocker of Stray Cats , Barenaked Ladies and Tiger Army . Larry Graham , Bernard Edwards, Mick Hogan, Andy Fraser, and Mel Schacher used an electric bass guitar. Some funk, R&B and jazz, fusion groups use synth bass or keyboard bass rather than electric bass. Stevie Wonder , Bootsy Collins , and Bernie Worrell have used a synth bass. Some traditional jazz bands use double bass or electric bass instead of a tuba; Bill Johnson and Steve Brown was one of the earliest double bassists in the New Orleans traditional jazz genre. In some jazz groups and jam bands , the basslines are played by a Hammond organ player, who uses the bass pedal keyboard or the lower manual for the low notes. Keyboard driven bass also occurs occasionally in rock bands, such as Atomic Rooster , and the Doors whose keyboardist Ray Manzarek notably used a Fender Rhodes piano bass with his left hand. \n\nElectric bassists play the bass guitar. In most rock, pop, metal and country genres, the bass line outlines the harmony of the music being performed, while simultaneously indicating the rhythmic pulse. In addition, there are many different standard bass line types for different genres and types of song (e.g. blues ballad, fast swing, etc.).\n\nBass lines often emphasize the root note, with a secondary role for the third, and fifth of each chord being used in a given song. In addition, pedal tones (repeated or sustained single notes), ostinatos , and bass riffs are also used as bass lines. While most electric bass players rarely play chords (three or more notes all sounded at the same time), chords are used in some styles, especially funk , R&B , soul music, jazz , rock, Latin and heavy metal music . Phil Lesh , a bassist for the rock band Grateful Dead was known for treating bass lines as counterparts, rather than emphasizing the root note. Lemmy Kilmister , bassist for rock bands Hawkwind and Motörhead , was described by some musicians and writers to have a playing style reminiscent of an acoustic guitarist, sometimes using chords. \n\nThe double bass is the standard bass instrument for classical music , bluegrass , rockabilly , and most genres of jazz .\n\nSee the List of contemporary classical double bass players .\n\nSee the List of jazz bassists , which includes both double bass and electric bass players.\n\nSee the List of double bassists in popular music , which includes blues, folk, country, etc.",
  "A loincloth is a one-piece garment, either wrapped around itself or kept in place by a belt . It covers the genitals and sometimes the buttocks . Loincloths which are held up by belts or strings are specifically known as breechcloth or breechclout . Often, the flaps hang down in front and back. \n\nLoincloths are worn in societies where no other clothing is needed or wanted. Loincloths are commonly used as an undergarment or swimsuit by wrestlers and by farmers in paddy fields in both Sri Lanka and India , where it is called Kovanam in Tamil, ambudaya in Sinhala and kaupinam or langot.\n\nThe loincloth, or breechcloth, is a basic form of dress, often worn as the only garment. Men have worn a loincloth as a fundamental piece of clothing which covers their genitals, not the buttocks, in most societies which disapproved of genital nakedness throughout human history. The loincloth is in essence a piece of material, bark- bast , leather , or cloth, passed between the legs and covering the genitals. Despite its functional simplicity, the loincloth comes in many different forms.\n\nThe styles in which breechcloths and loincloths can be arranged are myriad. Both the Bornean sirat and the Indian dhoti have fabric pass between the legs to support a man's genitals.\n\nA similar style of loincloth was also characteristic of ancient Mesoamerica . The male inhabitants of the area of modern Mexico wore a wound loincloth of woven fabric. One end of the loincloth was held up, the remainder passed between the thighs, wound about the waist, and secured in back by tucking. [ Note 1 ]\n\nIn Pre-Columbian South America , ancient Inca men wore a strip of cloth between their legs held up by strings or tape as a belt. The cloth was secured to the tapes at the back and the front portion hung in front as an apron , always well ornamented. [ citation needed ] The same garment, [ citation needed ] mostly in plain cotton but whose aprons are now, like T-shirts, sometimes decorated with logos, is known in Japan as etchu fundoshi .\n\nSome of the culturally diverse Amazonian indigenous still wear an ancestral type of loincloth. [ citation needed ]\n\nUntil World War II, Japanese men wore a loincloth known as a fundoshi . The fundoshi is a 35-centimetre-wide (14 in) piece of fabric (cotton or silk ) passed between the thighs and secured to cover the genitals. [ citation needed ]\n\nWorn by adult males in some Aboriginal cultures. Called naga , narga , nargar (etc) from Yulparija dialect of the Western Desert . \n\nUnsewn Kaupinam and its later-era sewn variation langot are traditional clothes in India , worn as underwear in dangal held in akharas especially wrestling , to prevent hernias and hydrocele . Kacchera is mandatory for Sikhs to wear.\n\nJapanese men and women traditionally wore a loincloth known as a fundoshi . The fundoshi is a 35 cm (14 in.) wide piece of fabric (cotton or silk ) passed between the thighs and secured to cover the genitals. There are many ways of tying the fundoshi . \n\nIn most Native American tribes, men used to wear some form of breechcloth, often with leggings . The style differed from tribe to tribe. In many tribes, the flaps hung down in front and back; in others, the breechcloth looped outside the belt and was tucked into the inside, for a more fitted look. Sometimes, the breechcloth was much shorter, and a decorated apron panel was attached in front and behind. \n\nA Native American woman or teenage girl might also wear a fitted breechcloth underneath her skirt, but not as outerwear. However, in many tribes' young girls did wear breechcloths like the boys until they became old enough for skirts and dresses. Among the Mohave people of the American Southwest, a breechcloth given to a young female symbolically recognizes her status as hwame . \n\nIn the Philippines, loincloths of any sort are generally called bahág . It is often a single, long, rectangular cloth that is not tied with a belt or string and were made from either barkcloth or hand- woven textiles . The design of the weave is often unique to a specific tribe, while colors may denote the wearer’s social rank, such as plain white for commoners. \n\nThroughout the pre-colonial period, the bahág was the normative dress for commoners and the servile class (the alipin caste). It survives today among some indigenous tribes of the Philippines , most notably the various Cordilleran peoples in the mountains of inland northern Luzon . \n\nThe bahág was also favoured by the pre-colonial noble ( tumao ) and warrior ( timawa ) classes of the Visayan people , as it showed off their elaborate, full-body tattoos ( batok ) that advertised combat prowess and other significant achievements: \n\nThe principal clothing of the Cebuanos and all the Visayans is the tattooing of which we have already spoken, with which a naked man appears to be dressed in a kind of handsome armor engraved with very fine work, a dress so esteemed by them they take it for their proudest attire, covering their bodies neither more nor less than a Christ crucified , so that although for solemn occasions they have the marlotas (robes) we mentioned, their dress at home and in their barrio is their tattoos and a bahag , as they call that cloth they wrap around their waist, which is the sort the ancient actors and gladiators used in Rome for decency's sake.\n\nOne method of wrapping the bahág involves first pulling the long rectangular cloth (usually around 2 to 3 m (6 ft 7 in to 9 ft 10 in)) in between the legs to cover the genitals, with a longer back flap. This back flap is then twisted across the right leg, then crossed at the waist in an anti-clockwise direction. It then goes under the front flap, then across the left leg. It is twisted back across the back loop, above the buttocks. The result is the two rectangular ends hanging in front of and behind the waist, with a loop around the legs resembling a belt.\n\nThe native Tagalog word for \"rainbow\", bahagharì , literally means \"loincloth of the king\". \n\nSome European men around 2000 BCE wore leather breechcloths, as can be seen from the clothing of Ötzi . Ancient Romans wore a type of loincloth known as a subligaculum .\n\nThe use of breechcloths took on common use by the Metis and Acadians and are mentioned as early as the 1650s. In the 1740s and 1750s they were issued to the Canadien as part of their war uniform and in 1755 they even tried to issue them to soldiers from France.\n\nDuring their travels across Canada, the French [canadiens] dress as the Indians; they do not wear breeches. Many nations imitate the French customs; yet I observed, on the contrary, that the French in Canada, in many respects, follow the customs of the Indians, with whom they converse everyday [ sic ? ]. They make use of the tobacco pipes, shoes, garters, and girdles of the Indians.\n\nThose who go to war receive a capot, two cotton shirts, one breechclout, one pair of leggings, one blanket, one pair of souliers de boeuf, a wood-handled knife, a worm and a musket when they do not bring any. The breechclout is a piece of broadcloth draped between the thighs in the Native manner and with the two ends held by a belt. One wears it without breeches to walk more easily in the woods.\n\nDuring the week the men went about in their homes dressed much like the Indians, namely, in stockings and shoes like theirs, with garters, and a girdle about the waist; otherwise the clothing was like that of other Frenchmen.\n\nThe French familiarized themselves with us, Studied our Tongue, and Manners, wore our Dress, Married our Daughters, and our Sons their Maids",
  "The Abbots' Palace in Oliwa ( Polish : Pałac Opatów w Oliwie ) is a rococo palace in Oliwa , a quarter of Gdańsk . It houses the Department of Modern Art of the National Museum in Gdańsk , and along with the Cistercian-Cathedral complex in Oliwa it is listed as a Historic Monument of Poland . \n\nThe first portion of the palace, the \"Old Palace\" was constructed in the 15th century. Later, in the first half of the sixteen hundreds a \"New Palace\" was added, which served as the residency of the then abbot of the Cistercians , Jan Grabiński . The final additions to the palace were made between 1754 and 1756, and were funded by another Cistercian abbot, Jacek Rybiński . \n\nAfter the partitions of Poland the area became part of Prussia , in 1831 real estate of the Cistercians was secularized and the palace became property of the House of Hohenzollern . From 1796 until 1836 the Bishops of Warmia , Karl von Hohenzollern-Hechingen and Joseph von Hohenzollern-Hechingen resided in the Palace. It remained empty until 1869 when Maria Anna von Hohenzollern-Hechingen , niece of Joseph, took up residence there. After her death in 1888 the ownership of the palace was taken over by the settlement of Oliwa, which used it for offices and apartments. \n\nDuring the interwar period of the Free City of Danzig the palace contained a museum which housed exhibitions on the history of the region. The director in charge of the museum was a Nazi activist named Erich Keyser . \n\nIn 1945, at the end of World War II (during which time it served as an arms depot) it was set on fire by German troops who sought to clear the terrain in front of the advancing Red Army . \n\nThe palace was rebuilt in 1965 through the efforts of the Muzeum Pomorskie w Gdańsku (Pomeranian Museum in Gdańsk). It initially served as the ethnographic department of the museum. In 1972 the Museum was elevated to a status of a National Museum . \n\nSince 1989 the palace contains the Department of Modern Art of the Polish National Museum in Gdańsk . In February 1990 a special gallery devoted to contemporary Polish art was established. Permanent exhibitions include works by Polish artists from 19th and 20th century (painting, sculpture and ceramics). Some of the artists whose works are on display include Zbigniew Pronaszko , Jan Cybis , Henryk Stażewski , Andrzej Wróblewski , Tadeusz Kantor , Jerzy Nowosielski , Alfred Lenica , Jan Lebenstein , Teresa Pągowska , Zdzisław Beksiński , Edward Dwurnik and Władysław Hasior . It also houses the \"Promotional Gallery\" which exhibits works by young artists.\n\nMedia related to Oliwa Palace in Gdańsk at Wikimedia Commons\n\n54°24′39″N 18°33′37″E ﻿ / ﻿ 54.41083°N 18.56028°E ﻿ / 54.41083; 18.56028",
  "Despicable Me is a 2010 American animated comedy film produced by Universal Pictures and Illumination Entertainment , and distributed by Universal. The first feature film from Illumination , it was directed by Chris Renaud and Pierre Coffin and produced by Chris Meledandri , Janet Healy , and John Cohen, from a screenplay by Cinco Paul and Ken Daurio based on a story by Sergio Pablos . Despicable Me stars the voices of Steve Carell , Jason Segel , Russell Brand , Kristen Wiig , Miranda Cosgrove , Will Arnett , Danny McBride , Jack McBrayer , and Julie Andrews . The film follows Felonious Gru , a longtime supervillain who adopts three orphan girls to use as pawns in a villainous scheme but reluctantly develops an emotional attachment to them.\n\nDevelopment of Despicable Me began when Pablos pitched the idea about a main character having villainous attributes and brought the concept to Meledandri following Illumination's foundation in 2007, with Paul and Daurio writing the script. The film was officially announced in 2008, with much of its creative team attached, while animation was provided by Paris-based studio Mac Guff (now Illumination Studios Paris ). Pharrell Williams and Heitor Pereira composed the film's score, with original songs written and performed by the former.\n\nDespicable Me debuted at the Annecy International Animated Film Festival on June 9, 2010, and was theatrically released in the United States on July 9. The film received positive reviews from critics and earned $543.2 million worldwide, becoming the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2010 . It was nominated for Best Animated Feature Film at the Golden Globe Awards , BAFTA Awards and Annie Awards and was also the winner for Favorite Animated Movie at the 2011 Kids' Choice Awards . Despicable Me began a successful franchise which includes six succeeding films.\n\nLongtime supervillain Felonious Gru has his pride hurt when an unknown rival steals the Great Pyramid of Giza . Gru, his elderly assistant Dr. Nefario, and his army of Minions devise a plan to steal the Moon. Seeking financial assistance, Gru approaches Mr. Perkins, the president of the Bank of Evil, who orders Gru to procure a shrink ray. While at the bank, Gru meets Perkins' son, Vector, who was responsible for the Pyramid heist. Gru and two of his Minions obtain the shrink ray from a research base in Southeast Asia, only for Vector to ambush them and steal it for himself.\n\nAfter many failed attempts to infiltrate Vector's fortress, Gru notices three orphaned girls, Margo, Edith, and Agnes, being allowed in to sell cookies to Vector. Gru adopts the girls under the guise of a dentist, using them to distract Vector while he reclaims the shrink ray. Afterwards, he tries to abandon the girls at an amusement park but ends up spending the day and bonding with them, much to Nefario's disapproval. Gru later shows Perkins the shrink ray through a video call, only to be rejected. Observing Gru's despair, the girls offer him their piggy bank, and the Minions pool their resources to fund the moon heist.\n\nMeanwhile, Perkins informs Vector of Gru's current possession of the shrink ray, prompting Vector to take action. Nefario calculates the day when the Moon is closest to Earth, which unfortunately coincides with the girls' upcoming ballet recital. Believing the girls are too much of a distraction to Gru, Nefario calls the orphanage's owner, Miss Hattie, to take the girls back. The next day, Gru successfully shrinks and steals the Moon. Hoping to make it to the recital on time, he rushes back to Earth but finds that the recital has ended, and that Vector has kidnapped the girls.\n\nArriving at Vector's fortress, Gru surrenders the Moon to Vector, but Vector refuses to give back the girls. Enraged, Gru storms Vector's fortress, and Vector activates his escape aircraft. Meanwhile, Nefario and the Minions discover that the shrink ray's effects are temporary; the bigger an object's mass, the faster it reverts to its original size. Gru, Nefario, and the Minions manage to rescue the girls before the Moon returns to its normal size and launches itself into orbit, destroying Vector's aircraft and leaving him stranded. Gru reclaims custody of the girls, and they celebrate with a special ballet recital (making up for the one Gru missed), which turns into a dance party.\n\nDespicable Me 's supporting voice cast includes Dana Gaier and Elsie Fisher as Gru's adopted daughters Edith and Agnes, respectively; and Pierre Coffin as the Minions, Gru's adorable and humorous henchmen, with Chris Renaud as Dave and Jemaine Clement as Jerry. Other actors who lent their voices in minor roles include Danny McBride as Gru's neighbor Fred McDade, Jack McBrayer as a carnival barker and a tourist dad, Mindy Kaling as a tourist mom, Rob Huebel as an anchorman, Ken Daurio as an Egyptian guard, and Ken Jeong as a talk-show host. \n\nTo develop Despicable Me (under the working title Evil Me ), Spanish animator Sergio Pablos pitched the idea about a main character having villainous attributes. Pablos brought his pitch to producer Chris Meledandri , who founded his animation studio Illumination Entertainment after leaving 20th Century Fox Animation in early 2007; screenwriters Cinco Paul and Ken Daurio began writing the script. Afterward, Meledandri brought together Pierre Coffin and Chris Renaud to direct the project. Coffin, who comes from Mac Guff, was recruited for his experience directing commercials for the studio, while Renaud was brought in for his animation experience in Blue Sky Studios . In November 2008, Illumination announced the beginning of development on its first CG animated film and project, Despicable Me . \n\nAfter being upset at recognizing Gru's behavior early in the production, which could become stale with audiences, Meledandri ordered the directors to lighten Despicable Me 's tone. Steve Carell reasoned this was because it could ruin the emotional weight between Gru and the three orphan girls. Carell suggested that the character \"displayed a sharp edge\". In response, two scenes were written: Gru popping a balloon and freezing customers. The language spoken by the Minions was invented by Coffin and Renaud; it is sometimes nicknamed \"Minionese\". \n\nTo save costs, the CGI animation and visual effects were handled by the Paris-based studio Mac Guff , with only 100 artists. Coffin, Renaud, and character designer Eric Guillon were responsible for creating the Minions. They did not exist in the original script until their addition during Despicable Me 's production. Initial designs for the Minions were humans and robots, before finalizing their appearances to small, yellow pill-shaped creatures. Renaud described the Minions as out of focus and \"not very smart\". The characters took inspiration from Oompa-Loompas in Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971) and Jawas in the Star Wars franchise, as well as silent screen stars Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin , and Warner Bros. cartoon characters, including Bugs Bunny . \n\nDespicable Me: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack is the soundtrack to the film of the same name, and it was released on July 6, 2010. It features new songs from the film written and performed by Pharrell Williams and performances by Destinee & Paris , the Sylvers , Robin Thicke , and the Bee Gees . \n\nUniversal Pictures partnered the film with licensing and promotional partners valued at $75 million for the marketing campaign. Additional marketing partners for the film included Airheads , Church's Chicken , Hungry Jack's , Color Me Mine, American Express , Kodak , IHOP , and Best Buy . As a promotional tie-in, Despicable Me: The Game was released in various platforms. \n\nDespicable Me debuted at the Annecy International Animated Film Festival on June 9, 2010, followed by a premiere on June 27, at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles. The film was released in the United States on July 9 with Predators . \n\nUniversal Pictures Home Entertainment released Despicable Me on Blu-ray , Blu-ray 3D , and DVD on December 14, 2010. Physical copies contain behind-the-scenes featurettes; filmmaker commentaries; games; and short films Home Makeover , Orientation Day , and Banana . A 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray version was released in 2017. \n\nDespicable Me earned $251.6 million in the United States and Canada and $291.6 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $543.2 million. It was the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2010 . \n\nIn the United States and Canada, Despicable Me was released with Predators on July 9, 2010. During its opening weekend, the film earned $60.1 million across 3,476 theaters. Its second weekend earnings dropped by 42 percent to $32.7 million, and followed by another $24.1 million on the third weekend. Despicable Me left theaters by January 20, 2011, making it the seventh-highest-grossing film of 2010 . \n\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 80% based on 201 reviews, with an average rating of 6.8/10. The site's critics consensus reads, \"Borrowing heavily (and intelligently) from Pixar and Looney Tunes , Despicable Me is a surprisingly thoughtful, family-friendly treat with a few surprises of its own.\" Metacritic , which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 72 out of 100 based on 35 critics, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. It is Illumination's highest rated film to date on both websites. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale. \n\nPeter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three stars out of four, saying the directors were skilled at \"springing surprises\" from the writers' \"ingenious\" screenplay. Peter Debruge of Variety wrote, \"Since villains so often steal the show in animation, Despicable Me smartly turns the whole operation over to megalomaniacal rogue Gru.\" Robert Wilonsky of The Village Voice wrote, \"The result is pleasant and diverting, if ultimately forgettable, and it's one of the rare instances in the recent history of 3-D's resurrection as The Savior of Cinema in which the technology doesn't dim the screen or distract the focus.\" Christy Lemire of the Associated Press wrote, \"Kids will dig it, adults will smile with amusement, and no one will be any different afterward than they were walking into the theater.\" Bill Goodykoontz of The Arizona Republic gave the film three and a half stars out of five, saying, \"Neither as rich in story nor stunning in animation as Pixar offerings, Despicable Me instead settles for simply being goofy good fun, and it hardly seems like settling at all.\" \n\nCarrie Rickey of The Philadelphia Inquirer gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying, \"Short, sweet-and-sour, and amusing rather than funny, Despicable Me can't help but be likable.\" Colin Covert of the Star Tribune gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying \"You'll probably leave the theater smiling, but don't expect to be emotionally engaged, Pixar-style. You'll be tickled, not touched.\" Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film three stars out of four, saying, \"A whip-smart family movie that makes inventive use of the summer's ubiquitous 3-D technology is something worth cheering.\" Tom Keogh of The Seattle Times gave the film three stars out of four, saying \" Despicable Me appeals both to our innocence and our glee over cartoon anarchy.\" Ty Burr of The Boston Globe gave the film three stars out of four, saying, \" Despicable Me has enough visual novelty and high spirits to keep the kiddies diverted and just enough wit to placate the parents.\" Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four, saying, \"The film is funny, energetic, teeth-gnashingly venomous and animated with an eye to exploiting the 3-D process with such sure-fire techniques as a visit to an amusement park.\" Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying, \"By taking the \"heart\" part just seriously enough, and in the nick of time, the movie saves itself from itself.\" \n\nKim Newman of Empire gave the film three stars out of five, saying, \"It's no first-rank CGI cartoon, but shows how Pixar's quality over crass is inspiring the mid-list. Fun, with teary bits, for kids fresh and smart for adults.\" Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying, \"The film throws so much ersatz cleverness and overdone emotion at the audience that we end up more worn out than entertained.\" Stephen Whitty of the Newark Star-Ledger gave the film two and a half stars out of four, saying, \"Unfortunately Despicable Me is just, predictably eh. And the one thing the larcenous Gru never steals is our heart.\" Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post gave the film three stars out of four, saying, \"An improbably heartwarming, not to mention visually delightful, diversion.\" Rick Groen of The Globe and Mail gave the film four stars out of four, saying, \"This animated thing pretty near out-Pixars Pixar.\" Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle gave the film two stars out of four, saying, \"When compared with the ambition and achievement of recent animated films, such as Coraline and Toy Story 3 , Despicable Me hardly seems to have been worth making, and it's barely worth watching.\" \n\nBob Mondello of NPR gave the film an eight out of ten, saying, \"It's all thoroughly adorable, and with an overlay that's nearly as odd as Carell's accent: Despicable Me looks a lot like other computer-animated pictures.\" A. O. Scott of The New York Times gave the film two stars out of five, saying, \"So much is going on in this movie that, while there's nothing worth despising, there's not much to remember either.\" Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter wrote, \"Despicable doesn't measure up to Pixar at its best. Nonetheless, it's funny, clever and warmly animated with memorable characters.\" Steve Persall of the Tampa Bay Times gave the film a B, saying, \"Directors Pierre Coffin and Chris Renaud craft a fun stretch run, wrapping the story with warm, fuzzy funnies and nothing to suggest a sequel, which is probably wise.\" Tasha Robinson of The A.V. Club gave the film a B, saying, \"Until the creep + orphans = happy family formula starts demanding abrupt, unconvincing character mutations, Despicable Me is a giddy joy.\" \n\nDespicable Me 's popularity grew following its release, which led to a successful multimedia franchise . Its basic premise of comedic aspects, including characters, has been replicated with varying degrees of success in films like Hotel Transylvania (2012), The Lego Movie (2014), Storks , The Secret Life of Pets (both 2016), The Lego Batman Movie , The Boss Baby , The Emoji Movie (all 2017), Toy Story 4 and Klaus (both 2019). [ citation needed ] The Minions, whose popularity was gradually increased since the film's release, became Illumination's mascots. Despicable Me inspired various Internet memes , including \"Gorl\" in reference to how Gru pronounces the word girl with his accent and \"Gru's Plan\", which is based on the film scene where Gru's presentation of his plan to steal the moon is interrupted when he finds a drawing of him sitting on the toilet in the presentation pages. It helped launch the career of Fisher. \n\nThe unexpected financial success of Despicable Me led to the development on a sequel, intent on capitalizing the original's popularity through that film's extensive marketing campaign. Despicable Me 2 (2013) surpassed the box-office take of Despicable Me , and received a similarly positive critical and audience response. The series narrative was expanded in three spin-off prequels– Minions (2015), Minions: The Rise of Gru (2022), and Minions 3 (2026) –and two further sequels– Despicable Me 3 (2017) and Despicable Me 4 (2024). ",
  "Weihnachtsmärchen (Christmas fairy tale) are plays for children, which are an inherent part of the theatre season in the German-speaking parts of Europe.\n\nThe theatres show fairy tales by the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen , A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens , adaptations of The Wizard of Oz and further adventures of Pippi Longstocking or Alice in Wonderland during the Adventszeit to placate the children until Christmas . Operas or ballets like Hänsel and Gretel and Der Nussknacker are performed concurrently for the same audience.\n\nThis tradition is comparable with pantomime in the English-speaking world, having much less cross-dressing and slapstick .",
  "Marie Bourgeois (1870-1937) was a French chef who gained three Michelin stars from 1933 to 1937 for her restaurant in Priay in the Ain region, France.\n\nMarie Bourgeois was born in Villette-sur-Ain in 1870. In the 1920s, she settled in a modest restaurant with her husband in Priay in the Ain region, 60 kilometers northeast of Lyon . In 1923, Bourgeois was the first woman to receive the award of the Club des Cent . \n\nIn 1927, she won first culinary prize in Paris and, six years later, in 1933, she received three stars from the Michelin Guide and kept them for four consecutive years. Her best-known recipes were hot pie, fresh frogs and the floating island with pink pralines. \n\nAfter her death in 1937, her daughter took over her restaurant until 1951. \n\nMères of France",
  "Giuseppe Tornatore (born 27 May 1956) is an Italian film director and screenwriter . He is considered one of the directors who brought critical acclaim back to Italian cinema. In a career spanning over 30 years he is best known for directing and writing drama films such as Everybody's Fine , The Legend of 1900 , Malèna , Baarìa and The Best Offer . His most noted film is Cinema Paradiso , for which Tornatore won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . He has also directed several advertising campaigns for Dolce & Gabbana . \n\nTornatore is also known for his long-standing association with composer Ennio Morricone , who composed music for thirteen Tornatore feature films since 1988. \n\nBorn in Bagheria , near Palermo , Tornatore developed an interest in acting and the theatre from at least the age of 16 and put on works by Luigi Pirandello and Eduardo De Filippo .\n\nHe worked initially as a freelance photographer. Then, switching to cinema, he made his debut with Le minoranze etniche in Sicilia ( The Ethnic Minorities in Sicily ), a collaborative documentary film which won a Salerno Festival prize. He then worked for RAI before releasing his first full-length film, The Professor , in 1985. This evoked a positive response from audiences and critics alike and Tornatore was awarded the Silver Ribbon for best new director .\n\nIn 1988 , a collaboration with producer Franco Cristaldi gave birth to Tornatore's best known screen work: Cinema Paradiso , a film narrating the life of a successful film director who has returned to his native town in Sicily for the funeral of his mentor. This obtained worldwide success and won an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film . Subsequently, Tornatore released several other films. In 2007 he won the Silver George for Best Director at the 29th Moscow International Film Festival for The Unknown Woman . \n\nTornatore describes himself as \"one who does not believe and who regrets this\". His brother, Francesco Tornatore, is a producer.",
  "In professional sports , a free agent is a player or manager who is eligible to sign with other clubs or franchises ; i.e., not under contract to any specific team. The term is also used in reference to a player who is under a contract at present but who is allowed to solicit offers from other teams. In some circumstances, the free agent's options are limited by the league's rules.\n\nFree agency was severely restricted in many sports leagues, instead clubs had a reserve clause which allowed them to retain players indefinitely.\n\nIn professional association football , a free agent is either a player that has been released by a professional association football club and now is no longer affiliated with any league, or a player whose contract with their current club has expired and is thus free to join any other club under the terms of the Bosman ruling .\n\nFree agents do not have to be signed during the normal transfer window that is implemented in some countries' leagues. If they are signed by a team, the team signing them does not have to pay any fees – sometimes this is known as \"a free transfer\".\n\nIf a player is released from their club when the transfer window is closed, they cannot sign for another team until the window reopens. A notable case of this being Sol Campbell who in September 2009 was released from Notts County , just after a month from signing on a free transfer . He signed for his former club Arsenal in January 2010 during the winter transfer window, after spending a few months training with the team to maintain his fitness.\n\nThe Australian Football League introduced free agency at the end of 2012, after having had a brief \"ten-year rule\" in 1973 (when it was known as the Victorian Football League).\n\nOut-of-contract players who are not within the top 25% paid players at their club will become unrestricted free agents after eight seasons of service at one club. Out-of-contract players who are within the top 25% paid players at their club become restricted free agents after eight seasons, then become unrestricted free agents after ten seasons. Clubs receive compensation in the form of draft picks for the loss of out-of-contract free agents, but players who are delisted become unrestricted free agents, regardless of length of service, and clubs are not compensated for the transfer of such free agents. \n\nThe NFL's current free agency system was introduced on March 1, 1993. \n\nUnrestricted free agents (UFAs) are players with expired contracts that have completed four or more accrued seasons of service. They are free to sign with any franchise. \n\nRestricted free agents (RFAs) are players who have three accrued seasons of service and whose contracts have expired. RFAs have received qualifying offers from their old clubs and are free to negotiate with any club until a deadline which occurs approximately a week prior to the NFL Draft (for 2010 the deadline was April 15), at which time their rights revert to their original club. If a player accepts an offer from a new club, the old club will have the right to match the offer and retain the player. If the old club elects not to match the offer, it may receive draft-choice compensation depending on the level of the qualifying offer made to the player. \n\nExclusive rights free agents (ERFAs) are players with two or fewer seasons of service time and whose contracts have expired. If their team tenders a qualifying offer (a one-year contract usually at league-minimum salary) the player has no negotiating rights with other teams, and must either sign the tender with the team or sit out the season. \n\nUndrafted free agents are players eligible for the NFL draft but were not selected; they can sign with any team.\n\nPlan B free agency was a type of free agency that became active in the National Football League in February 1989 to 1992. Plan B free agency permitted all teams in the NFL to preserve limited rights of no more than 37 total players a season; if a player was a protected Plan B free agent, he was incapable of signing with another team without providing his old team the first opportunity to sign him again. The rest of the players were left unprotected, liberated to negotiate contracts with the rest of the teams in the league.\n\nEight players sued the NFL in U.S. federal court, stating that Plan B was an unlawful restraint of trade. In 1992, a jury found that Plan B violated antitrust laws and awarded damages to these players. \n\nIn the National Hockey League (NHL), between 2005 and 2008, the age of unrestricted free agency declined from 31 to 27. Under the old collective agreement, which expired in 2004, draft picks were awarded as compensation when a team lost an unrestricted free agent; however, under the current CBA teams losing unrestricted free agents do not receive any compensation.\n\nIn addition, any player at least 22 years of age who has not been selected in the NHL entry draft can sign with any team as a free agent. Any player who is not entry-level, but does not meet the qualifications of unrestricted free agency becomes a restricted free agent when his contract expires. \n\nPlayers eligible for free agency are 24 years of age and older with five MLS service years and are out of contract or have had their option declined. \n\nFree agency has been available in the National Women's Soccer League since 2023; players eligible for free agency are required six years of service within the NWSL. \n\nIn Major League Rugby , a player can be signed by any team as a free agent at 18 years old as long as they don't enroll in college. In case they do, they have to wait for MLR Draft at 21 years old. \n\nIn some leagues, free agency has deadlines . For example, under the most recent NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement , restricted free agents who do not sign contracts by December 1 of a given year will be ineligible to play in the National Hockey League for the balance of that season. However, other leagues (such as the National Basketball Association ) have no such restrictions on signing periods in season, despite having a moratorium in the offseason. \n\nIn Europe, players can only move during transfer windows —during the close season and halfway through the league season. There are exceptions for unsigned professional players in the lower divisions.\n\nUnrestricted free agents (UFA) are players not under contract with a team. They have either been released from their club, had the term of their contract expire without a renewal, or were not chosen in a league's draft of amateur players. These people, generally speaking, are free to entertain offers from all other teams in the player's most recent league and elsewhere and to decide with whom to sign a contract. Players who have been bought out of league standard contracts may have restrictions within that league, such as not being able to sign with the buy-out club for a period of time in the NHL, but are otherwise not restricted.\n\nRestricted free agents (RFA) are typically players under contract with a team but are able to negotiate offers from other teams, with their current team able to match the terms of the newly offered contract. For a restricted free agent, some leagues require the comp team to offer to the original team one or more draft picks, when an offer is not matched, as compensation for losing the player.\n\nUndrafted free agents (UDFA) are players who were unselected in a league's annual draft of amateur players and are then free to negotiate contracts with any team. In most American professional sports, players are drafted by sequencing each team from worst to best (according to the teams' win–loss records the previous season, sometimes invoking a draft lottery factor to avoid having teams intentionally lose their last games to gain higher draft position) and allowing said teams to claim rights to the top players entering the league that year. Players who pass through an entire draft (usually several rounds) without being selected by any of the league's teams become unrestricted free agents, and these players are sometimes identified simply as undrafted free agents (UDFA) or undrafted sportspersons and are free to sign with any team they choose. The term \"undrafted free agent\" is most common in the National Football League (NFL), where rookies enter directly into the NFL and do not play in a minor league system. It can also occasionally be seen in the National Hockey League (NHL), which increasingly uses college hockey as a source; the NHL entry draft usually drafts players of high school age (i.e., junior leagues ), which allows overlooked players who excel at the college level or in European professional leagues to bypass the draft and sign directly with the NHL.\n\nIn the European Union , the 1995 Bosman ruling by the European Court of Justice established the right of free agency for association football players in all EU member nations. The Bosman ruling has since been extended to cover other professional sports and players from Eastern Europe. Players were still tied to their clubs unless their contract ran out until the Webster ruling allowed players the opportunity to move between nations, though it does not allow free players to move within the national league in which they currently play.\n\nA free agent bust is a highly touted or highly signed free agent who does not meet expectations. This can be for a variety of reasons such as being unable to adjust to the team's more demanding role, system or scheme of the team or if their time with team was affected by injuries.\n\nIn the NFL, numerous of notable highly touted free agents have signed with other teams, with the tenures being busts. One example is Larry Brown , most known from his two interception game which earned him a Super Bowl MVP award and championship in Super Bowl XXX , signed a five-year, $12.5 million free-agent deal with the Oakland Raiders . Brown played just 12 games with Oakland and then was waived after two seasons with the team. Another well known example is Albert Haynesworth . The highly coveted defensive tackle signed with the Redskins for a seven-year, $100 million deal which ultimately busted with his laziness and ineffectiveness on the team. He was let go after two years.",
  "Karashi ( 芥子, 辛子, からし, or カラシ ) , also known as oni karashi , is a type of mustard used as a condiment or as a seasoning in Japanese cuisine . Karashi is made from the crushed seeds of Brassica juncea (brown mustard) and is usually sold in either powdered or paste form. Karashi in powdered form is prepared by mixing with tepid water to a paste and leaving it covered for a few minutes. \n\nKarashi is often served with tonkatsu , oden , nattō , and shumai . It can be used as part of a dipping sauce when mixed with mayonnaise , called karashi mayonnaise or with vinegar and miso , called karashi su miso . \n\nIt is also used to make pickled Japanese eggplant , called karashi-nasu . \n\nOne of Kumamoto 's best-known meibutsu (regional specialities) is karashi renkon : lotus root stuffed with karashi -flavoured miso , deep fried, and served in slices.\n\nKarashi is served with various dishes. It is considerably stronger than American or French mustard, so a small amount is enough.\n\nThis Japanese cuisine–related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .",
  "Oskar Schindler 's Enamel Factory ( Polish : Fabryka Emalia Oskara Schindlera ) is a former metal item factory in Kraków . It now hosts two museums: the Museum of Contemporary Art in Kraków , on the former workshops, and a branch of the Historical Museum of the City of Kraków , situated at ul. Lipowa 4 (4 Lipowa Street) in the district of Zabłocie [ pl ] , in the administrative building of the former enamel factory known as Oskar Schindler's Deutsche Emailwarenfabrik (DEF), as seen in the film Schindler's List . Operating here before DEF was the first Malopolska factory of enamelware and metal products limited liability company, instituted in March 1937.\n\nPierwsza Małopolska Fabryka Naczyń Emaliowanych i Wyrobów Blaszanych “Rekord,”Spółka z ograniczoną odpowiedzialnością w Krakowie ('Rekord' First Małopolska Factory of Enamel Vessels and Tinware, Limited Liability Company in Kraków) was established in March 1937 by three Jewish entrepreneurs: Michał Gutman from Bedzin, Izrael Kahn from Kraków, and Wolf Luzer Glajtman from Olkusz. The partners leased the production halls from the factory of wire, mesh, and iron products with its characteristic sawtooth roofs, and purchased a plot at ul. Lipowa 4 for their future base. It was then that the following were built: the stamping room where metal sheets were processed, prepared and pressed, the deacidification facility (varnishing) where the vessels were bathed in a solution of sulfuric acid to remove all impurities and grease, and the enamel shop, where enamel was laid in a number of layers: the priming coat first, then the colour, and finally another protective coat.\n\nThe ownership of the company changed a number of times, and its financial situation continued to worsen. In June 1939, the company applied for insolvency, which was officially announced by the Regional Court in Kraków.\n\nOn 1 September 1939, Nazi Germany invaded Poland and the Second World War broke out. On 6 September, German troops entered Kraków. It was also probably around that time in which Oskar Schindler , a Sudeten German who was a member of the Nazi Party and an agent of the Abwehr , arrived in Kraków. Using the power of the German occupation forces in the capacity of a trustee, he took over the German kitchenware shop on ul. Krakowska, and in November 1939, on the power of the decision of the Trusteeship Authority he took over the receivership of the \"Rekord\" company in Zabłocie. He also produced ammunition shells, so that his factory would be classed as an essential part of the war effort. He managed to build a subcamp of the Płaszów forced labor camp in the premises where \"his\" Jews had scarce contact with camp guards.\n\nIn January 1940, Schindler changed the name of the factory to Deutsche Emailwarenfabrik - DEF. Initially, non-Jewish Poles predominated among the employed workers. Year by year, the number of Jewish Polish workers recruited through the ghetto wage office increased. Schindler in this respect was initially driven by economic reasons—employing Jews significantly decreased the costs of recruitment, as they did not receive any compensation. For each Polish Jewish worker, the factory director paid a small fee to the SS - 4 złotys per day for a working woman and 5 złotys per day for a working man. The non-Jewish Poles remained employed mainly in administrative positions. The number of Polish Jewish workers increased from over 150 in 1940 to around 1100 in 1944 (this is the sum of workers from three nearby factories, barracked in the sub-camp at DEF).\n\nFrom the very beginning of the factory's operation, Schindler used part of its profits to provide food for its Jewish workers. The working conditions were difficult, especially at the stands at enamel furnaces and at ladles with sulfuric acid, with which the workers (predominantly women) had direct contact. Other difficulties included low temperatures in the winter, as well as lice epidemics, which caused mainly dysentery, but also typhus. On the other hand, workers at Schindler's factory received bigger food portions than in other factories based on forced labour. During the existence of the ghetto in Podgórze , Jewish workers were led to the factory under the escort of industrial guards ( Werkschutzs ) or Ukrainians.\n\nWhen the ghetto was liquidated in 1943, Kraków Jews who escaped death at that time were transferred to the Plaszow labour camp . The distance from the ghetto to Schindler’s Emalia factory had not been very far, but from the Płaszów camp the inmates had to walk several miles. Their workday was already twelve hours long, and Schindler felt sorry for his people. Schindler then applied for a permit to establish a sub-camp of the Plaszow camp on the premises of his factory. He argued that his employees had to walk more than ten kilometers from the camp to the factory every day. Bringing them to the factory would increase its efficiency. His arguments as well as bribes made his plan come to life. In the barracks in Zabłocie, employees of DEF and three neighboring companies producing for the needs of the German army were accommodated. The camp was surrounded by barbed wire, watchtowers were built, and an assembly square was situated between the barracks. The nutritional conditions were much better than in the Płaszow camp, especially due to the cooperation with Polish employees - they contacted people in the city, brought letters and food to the Jewish workers.\n\nThe production in the factory and the camp was controlled, and Hauptsturmführer Amon Göth , the commandant of the Plaszow camp, was often a guest here. Thanks to Schindler's efforts, the inspections were not so burdensome for the plant employees. It was only after the Płaszow camp was transformed into a concentration camp in January 1944 that the prisoners from Zabłocie were subject to permanent SS control. The work initially lasted 12 hours in a two-shift system, then 8 hours in a three-shift system. As the eastern front approached Kraków, the Germans began to liquidate the camps and prisons in the east of the General Government . It was then that Oskar Schindler decided to evacuate the factory with its employees to Brünnlitz in Reichsgau Sudetenland , located in the northern part of the Sudetenland in what had been Czechoslovakia (now part of the Czech Republic ). \n\nAfter the war, as early as 1946, the factory was nationalized. In the 1948–2002 period, the former DEF facilities were used by Krakowskie Zakłady Elektroniczne Unitra-Telpod (later renamed Telpod S.A.), a company manufacturing telecommunications equipment. Only in 2005, the territory returned to the use of the city of Krakow, and since 2007 the exposition of the ‘Krakow Historical Museum’ called ”Krakow. The period of occupation 1939-1945” has been located here. The museum has the desk and the stairs from the set of Schindler's List as part of the tour. ",
  "Romanian philosophy is the entirety of philosophy written by Romanian authors. The term can also be used to refer to all philosophy written in Romanian language or to works of philosophers native to the region of Romania before the country's formation.\n\nThe first broadly philosophical texts attested on the Romanian territory are the Patristic writings. Among this corpus of texts, in Church Slavonic translations, the most important are the works of Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite and the Dialectics of St. John Damascene . Excerpts from ancient philosophers circulated also. The only notable indigenous production of the epoch is The Teachings of Neagoe Basarab to his Son, Theodosius , written around 1521. The book is a compilation of patristic and biblical sources, with many moral and political reflections, from an ascetic viewpoint. It illustrates Byzantine theocracy and proposes the model of a prince-monk.\n\nIn the middle of the 17th century, Romanian acquires the status of liturgical language alongside Greek and Slavonic, and begins to develop a philosophical vocabulary. Nicolae Milescu (1638–1708) authored the first translation of a philosophical text into Romanian (the treatise On the Dominant Reason of Pseudo-Josephus Flavius, translated towards 1688). Miron Costin (1633–1691) wrote the first philosophical poem in Romanian, Viaţa lumii ( The Life of the World ) (1672), an ethical reflection on the earthly happiness. The most important philosophical production of this century is The Divan (1698) of Dimitrie Cantemir (1673–1723), a philosophical treatise which supports the Orthodox ethics with rational arguments. This treatise was translated into Arabic for the use of the Syrian Christians, and, later, into Bulgarian.\n\nSome philosophical texts were written in Latin. Gavril Ivul (1619–1678), a Jesuit who taught philosophy in the University of Vienna , wrote a logical treatise, Propositiones ex universa logica (1654). Cantemir authored a textbook of logic and a treatise of \"theologo-physics\", Sacrosanctae scientiae indepingibilis imago (1700) which, besides discussing the nature of time, and the problem of the universals, tries to justify Biblical cosmogony with non-theological arguments drawing on the philosophy of Jan Baptist van Helmont . He left also a text on the philosophy of history, Monarchiarum physica examinatio .\n\nIn the 18th century, the dominant philosophy in Moldavia and Walachia is the neo-Aristotelianism of Theophilos Corydalleus , which was in fact the Paduan neo-Aristotelianism of Zabarella , Pomponazzi and Cremonini . Towards the last quarter of the century, this was challenged by the spread of rationalism ( Christian Wolff ) and empiricism ( John Locke ). Important figures may be considered Samuel Micu (1745–1806) in Transylvania , and Iosif Moisiodax (1730–1800) in Moldavia. The first translated intensively from the Wolffian Baumeister, implicitly promoting German enlightenment. The last contributed decisively at the modernization of the philosophical curriculum in the Princely Academies. He wrote an essay called The Apology , a splendid plea for modern European philosophy and against the old Aristotelian Chorydaleian scholasticism. The philosophical language of this century was mostly Greek. One notable exception is provided by the clucer Ioan Geanetu (Jean Zanetti), who published in 1787, in Greek and French, a treatise called Réfutation du traité d'Ocellus de la nature de l'univers . Here he criticised an ancient conception regarding the eternity of the universe, in order to reinforce the faith of his correligionaries.\n\nThe 19th century can be divided from the point of view of a history of philosophy into three periods: that of the final days of the Phanariote regime, that of the restoration of the Romanian dynasties and, finally, that of Charles I, who came from a foreign dynasty (Hohenzollern).\n\nIn the first two decades of the 19th century the most prominent philosophers in the Romanian Principalities are still the Greek professors of the Princely Academies. Among them, we can mention Lambros Photiades , Konstantinos Vardalachos , Neophyte Doucas and Benjamin Lesvios in Bucharest, as well as Daniel Philippidis , Stephanos Doungas and Dimitrios Panayotou Govdelas in Iași. Some of them were alumni of the Academies from the Principalities, as Vardalachos, who studied with Photiades, himself an ancient student of the Princely Academy from Bucharest. Daniel Philippidis also studied at this Academy in the 1780s, under the famous philologist Neophyte Cavsocalyvitis . But they had studied also (with the exception of Photiades) in major Western universities. Doungas, for example, was a student of Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling . In his Physics he tried to reconcile the dogmatic Orthodox theology with the science of nature, following Schelling's system.\n\nThey were not only proponents of modern philosophy and natural sciences, but also of Enlightenment ideas. The philosophy of the French \"philosophes\" had thus a major impact on the Romanian intelligentsia through their courses and published books. Philosophically, the most interesting of these authors is Beniamin Lesvios, whose Metaphysics contains, among other valuable things, a theory of perception involving the discussion of the conceptual possibility of colour-inversion. Also, it is worth mentioning that Philippides is the first follower of Kant in the Romanian Principalities.\n\nAfter 1821, the ruling Princes will be once again elected by local noblemen i.e. the boyars (and validated by the Sultan). The Greek will be replaced in the Academies with the Romanian. It is an era of exalted patriotism and de-hellenization of Romanian culture and habits. Romanians begin to go directly to Western sources and to practice philosophy in their own language.\n\nAs early as 1818 the Transylvanian Gheorghe Lazăr (1779–1821), who studied in Vienna, began teaching philosophy in Romanian in the Greek-speaking Academy. None of his teaching courses were preserved yet one of his student, Ion Heliade Rădulescu , recalled they were based on Kantian philosophy . For didactical purposes he decided to make a Romanian translation of some of Krug's works, which he subsequently used as a textbook. Krug's Handbook of Philosophy and Philosophical Literature will be translated in the first period of the 19th century another three times, by August Treboniu Laurian , Timotei Cipariu and Simeon Barnutiu . \n\nAn important philosopher of this period is Eufrosin Poteca (1786–1858). He studied in the Princely Academy from Bucharest with Vardalachos, Doukas and Lesvios and at the universities of Pisa and Paris (1820–1825). Eufrosin Poteca taught philosophy at the Saint Sava Academy, and was a prolific translator of philosophical and theological works. His own philosophy was strongly influenced by the Sensualism of Condillac , de Tracy and Soave, by Rousseau 's political philosophy and by his strong Christian beliefs. He maintained that there are three metaphysical first principles, body, soul and spirit, studied by three distinct sciences: physics (the study of unanimated bodies), psychology (the study of animated things) and ideology (in the sense of de Tracy, the science of ideas). The whole universe displays this triadic structure, as it is permeated by matter, life and logos. He identified the laws of nature with the laws of God, and he drew from this conception many moral conclusions, e.g. the lack of foundation of celibacy. Also, he thought that the foundation of all morals, politics and rights is the golden rule. From here he argued against slavery, and that got him exiled to a remote monastery, where he lived until the end of his life.\n\nIonică Tăutul (1798–1828) was a Moldavian boyar educated at home by some French refugees, acquiring an extensive knowledge of political philosophy. He quoted Locke, Rousseau , Montesquieu , Voltaire , but also obscure writers such as Sabatier de Castre. His ideas were disseminated mostly in his correspondence and political pamphlets but also in works like Construction of Politics according to Human Nature or Essay against Deists and Materialists . His intention was to build a political theory starting from a Christian anthropology of the state of nature. The political system to be justified by such a procedure was an \"aristo-democratic republic\". The second essay, whose title is inspired by Mersenne , criticizes the materialist vision of the man-machine ( La Mettrie ) on the basis of a rather Paulinic doctrine of the \"amphibian\" character of man, character which clearly distinguishes him from the natural world.\n\nAlexandru Hâjdeu (1811–1872) was a student of Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling in Berlin. Although very proud of his Moldavian origin, he was an ardent Russian patriot, since he lived in Bessarabia , the Moldavian territory annexed by Russia. His philosophy was concerned with the destiny of Russia, and he was a slavophil and a messianist. He argued for the development of a purely Russian philosophy, emerging from the careful study of the Russian language. According to him, only such a philosophy could be national, an only this way the Russian element could be brought to universality. The way to arrive at such a philosophy is to continue the thinking of Skovoroda , the only authentic Russian philosopher up to then, which would fulfil the moment of existence for itself of the Russian nation. \n\nIoan Zalomit (1820–1885) studied philosophy in France and in Germany, at Berlin, with Victor Cousin and Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling . He obtained here the title of doctor of philosophy with a thesis on Kant (1848). In his inaugural dissertation , Zalomit tried to overcome the Kantian opposition between laws of nature and moral laws. He affirmed that liberty is inherent to nature, so that the moral laws are in fact laws of nature. All the moral actions are thus the result of a \"duty towards nature\" and it is only this way that a rational theodicy is possible. \n\nSimeon Bărnuțiu (1808–1864) taught philosophy at Blaj College, at Mihaileana Academy and, finally, at University of Iași . His remaining published courses are mostly adaptations after Krug. He was the first Romanian philosopher preoccupied with the philosophy of law . He considered Romanian law to be a direct continuation of Roman law and advocated for a return to Roman law principles, as well as for the introduction of Latin neologisms in Romanian language. His political activity was centered around the rights of Romanians in Transylvania , and his philosophical views were employed in the defense of his political stances several times, including in Blaj Pronouncement . The main arguments were based on the principle of natural law . \n\nIon Heliade Rădulescu (1802–1872) studied at the Princely Academy from Bucharest , under Constantin Vardalah, and from 1818 the Romanian classes of Gheorghe Lazăr . After the death of Lazăr he became a teacher in the Academy and he had a prodigious activity as a cultural animator. In 1828 he published an \"almost philosophical\" (in his words) Gramatica românească ( Romanian Grammar ), influenced by Condillac , which he knew from his Greek teachers. After the turmoil of the 1848 Revolution, Heliade Rădulescu comes up with a philosophical system, inspired from kabala and the socialism of Proudhon and Fourier . There are also traces of Hegel 's influence, but not directly read (he knew him probably from the works of Cousin). His two most important works are Historia critică universală ( The Universal Critical History ) and Equilibru între antithesi sau Spiritul şi materia ( Equilibrium between Antitheses ). \n\nHeliade Rădulescu proposes, against monisms and dualisms of all kind, a trinitarian philosophy. He affirms that all philosophical concepts come in dualities, which can be classified in two categories: sympathetic (or parallel) and antipathetic. A sympathetic duality is formed by two \"positive\" terms, which indicate an existence: time / space; spirit / matter; right / duty etc. An antipathetic duality contains a positive and a negative term: life / death; movement / inertia; good / evil. Each sympathetic duality produces a third term, through which the dualism is overcome in the form of active principle - passive principle - (generate) a result, for example: spirit / matter / universe; form / substance / body; progress / conservation / perfectibility; spiritual man / physical man / moral man. Beginning from here, Heliade Rădulescu develops a kind of cosmology. In his view, the spirit, being immaterial, can only come into contact with the matter through the mediation of the matter's most immaterial parts. This theory of balance permeates all of his works: political, philosophical, or literary. \n\nIn 1860 and 1864 Prince Alexandru Ioan Cuza founds the Universities of Iași and Bucharest, and in 1866 Karl von Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen becomes, under the name Carol I, Domnitor of the Principality of Romania , which will later become the Kingdom of Romania . This event marks a new wave of westernization, as well as a reaction against the formerly prevalent cultural model, that of Enlightenment. Almost at the same time, in 1863, the \"Junimnea\" literary society is founded in Iași.\n\nThe last thirty years of the 19th century are culturally dominated by the Junimea society. The Romanian philosophy will have a new beginning and, for the first time, an international echo. The philosophers from Junimea were Titu Maiorescu (1840–1917), Vasile Conta (1846–1882), Alexandru Xenopol (1847–1920), Mihai Eminescu (1850–1889), Constantin Leonardescu (1844–1907), Ioan Pop Florantin (1843–1926).\n\nTitu Maiorescu studied the philosophy at Theresianum between 1851 and 1858, under the guidance of H. Suttner who introduced him to Herbart 's philosophy. He obtained his two doctorates from the University of Giessen , and later from the University of Paris. His first philosophical paper was Einiges Philosophische in gemeinfasslicher Form (1860), a work that was rather well received, written under the influence of Herbart and Feuerbach. He became a member of Berlin Philosophical Society, which represented Hegelianism. Returning to his country in November 1861, he held lectures on logic and history of philosophy at the University of Iasi (1863–1871) and University of Bucharest (1884–1907), having as students, among others, Constantin Rădulescu-Motru , Ion Petrovici , P. P. Negulescu , Mircea Florian . \n\nIn his early works he started from Herbart's idea of logical validity being restricted to objects in a reciprocal relation. From here, Maiorescu developed an epistemological view based on relationship. Philosophy would then be the study of the relation between things, a relation that is not in the object itself, but in the mind. Following Harbert's method, he proposed a mechanical description of the mind and of philosophy, ordered on five fundamental categories, from the most concrete to the most abstract: psychology, logic, metaphysic, mathematic, and ethic. In the second part of his life his focus changed to the Romanian philosophy and its natural development, starting with his În contra direcției de astăzi în cultura română ( Against Today's Direction in Romanian Culture ) (1868), influenced by Herbert Spencer . Consequently, he criticized the practice of re-latinization of the language promoted by the Transylvanian School , as well as Simion Bărnuțiu 's reliance on Roman jurisprudence. His theory of forme fără fond (forms without a basis) entered national culture. The theory states that every national culture has a distinct spirituality basis upon which it forms its own elements, and when these elements are adopted from another cultural context, the forms become harmful. In Maiorescu's view, generations like those involved in 1848 events adopted Western cultural elements without proper consideration to the national basis, and, in consequence, Romanian culture was suffocated with forms which it could not interiorize since they did not belong to its cultural base. \n\nVasile Conta obtained his doctorate from the Université libre de Bruxelles and functioned as a Professor of Law at the University of Iași . His works, published in Romanian and French, included La théorie du fatalisme (1877) and La théorie de l'ondulation universelle (1895). Conta was influenced by three sources: the evolutionist philosophy of Herbert Spencer , the positivism of August Compte , and the German materialism of Büchner , Vogt , and Moleschott . In his first work he defends a version of determinism, called \"fatalism\", and proposes a materialist theory of knowledge (or rather, a materialist model of cognition). Cognition is accounted for in terms of material modifications of the brain. He thought that sensorial input is transmitted through the nervous fibres under the form of \"shakings\", or vibrations, which provoke the apparition of physiological changes in the brain, called \"imprintings\". In the second cited work, Conta proposes a materialist metaphysics, affirming the wave-like character of the universe; according to this conception, the evolution of the universe as a whole, and of each entity in this universe has a wave-like character. Conta wrote also books on the history of metaphysics, on the nature of metaphysics, on the \"first principles that constitute the world\". He dissociated from the positivists of his time by arguing for the importance of metaphysics and for the presence of an artistic element in the construction of the metaphysical systems. \n\nAlexandru Xenopol , historian and philosopher, had two doctorates, one of them in philosophy, conferred from the University of Giessen . His philosophy emerged from his constant preoccupations with history He draws a distinction between facts of repetition, and facts of succession. The facts of repetition are studied by the natural sciences, and are characterized by natural laws. The facts of succession are studied by the sciences of the spirit, notably by history, and they are not subsumed to any law, but they form series. For Xenopol historical series are causal, and can be explained as the result of other interconnected series of historical events, but they are not predictable. He also discussed the concept of causality, the notion of hypothesis and of the verification of hypothesis. \n\nConstantin Leonardescu studied at the Universities of Bucharest and Paris, and was a professor of philosophy in the University of Iași . Generally, he was influenced by the French eclecticism and he had a thoroughly \"scientific\" attitude in philosophy. Like many of his time, Leonardescu had a great interested in psychology, science which he tried to apply to diverse domains of philosophy, such as epistemology and aesthetics. His list of published books includes Philosophy Face to the Progress of Positive Sciences (1876), Metaphysics, Religion and Science (1884), The Principles of Psychology (1892), The Inductive Morals or the Science of the Human Behaviour (1885). \n\nIoan Pop Florantin, studied philosophy and philology at the University of Vienna , taught philosophy in several high-schools in Iași . He authored several books on logic, psychology, and general philosophy, as well as the first Romania treatise on aesthetics. He advanced also a personal conception called \"the universal consecutionism\", according to which nothing is at it appears at a certain moment, but a sequence of actions that we perceive as activities, rather than static concepts. \n\nPrince Grigore Sturdza (1821–1901) was a learned man, who had philosophical preoccupations. He published some philosophical works in French, among which Les lois fondamentales de l'Univers (1891) is the most important. The book's subject-matter is chiefly the astronomy, or the scientific cosmology, which eventually serves as a basis for metaphysical speculations. \n\nOutside the borders of the Principality, later Kingdom, of Romania, we can notice the activity of Vasile Lucaciu (1852–1922). Of Greek-catholic confession, he studied at Rome where he obtained his doctorate in theology and philosophy. He is the author of a Thomist philosophical system, Institutions of Philosophy , published between 1881 and 1884 in three volumes: Logic (1881), Metaphysics (1882), and Moral Philosophy (1884). \n\nDuring the 20th century, the history of Romanian philosophy can be divided in three periods: the pre-communist period, the communist period, and the post-communist period.\n\nTwo major \"schools\" of philosophy have produced, in the first half of the century, two peaks of Romanian philosophy: the school of Maiorescu, and the school of Nae Ionescu . Transylvanian philosophers can also be grouped together, mostly by reason of their non affiliation to the two other schools, but also on the reason of their belonging to the same spiritual family. Apart this three \"schools\" or orientations, there are many other authors, cultivating with predilection the philosophical essay. A special mention deserve the members of the Onicescu circle, aptly characterised as analytic philosophers.\n\nThe \"Maiorescians\" are Constantin Rădulescu-Motru (1868–1957), P. P. Negulescu (1872–1951), Dumitru Draghicescu (1875–1945), Ion Petrovici (1882–1972), and Mircea Florian (1888–1960).\n\nConstantin Rădulescu-Motru , the grandson of Eufrosin Poteca , called his philosophical system \"Energetic Personalism\", influenced by the Otswald's energetism and Stern's personalism. An expert in experimental psychology (he studied under Wundt in Leipzig , getting his doctorate with a dissertation on Kant ), he followed the inductivist trend in metaphysics. The human personality was considered by him a superior form of energy, the final stage of the evolution of the universe. His metaphysics implies a political program as well as an ethics of labor. The purpose of the political life must be the transition from the \"anarchic personalism\" that governed the Romanian society to \"energetic personalism\". In his Timp şi destin ( Time and Destiny ) (1940) he started from the bergsonian distinction between objective and subjective time, adding a new category: time as destiny, a time of becoming. \n\nP. P. Negulescu was one of the most prolific Romanian thinkers. His reflections on the origin of culture were published in a two volume Filosofia Renașterii (\"Renaissance Philosophy\"), in Istoria filozofiei contemporane ( The History of Contemporary Philosophy ), and in Destinul omenirii ( The Destiny of Humanity ). Early influenced by Spencer's empiricism, he remained convinced throughout his activity of the relativity of knowledge. A devoted of Maiorescu school of thought, he followed in his footsteps and taught philosophy at the Bucharest University after the Maiorescu's retirement. \n\nDumitru Drăghicescu obtained his licence in philosophy with a memoir on the Influence of Kant on Auguste Compte (1901) at the University of Bucharest , continuing his studies in Paris, where he did his doctorate with Durkheim , titled Du Rôle de l’individu dans le déterminisme social . He wrote on the report between social reality and biological determinism , theorizing that social acts are the outcomes of intention and volition and therefore biological determinism is in contrast and secondary to social determinism. \n\nIon Petrovici wrote on logic and metaphysics. In logic he contributed to the logical theory of notions, mainly regarding the relations between the intension and the extension of a term; he contradicted the law of their inverse dependence. In metaphysics perhaps the most well known of his contributions is the lecture \"The Idea of Nothingness\" (1933), in which the nothingness was determined as a \"transcendent substance\", preceding existence and transcending it, but manifesting itself immanently in the existent things.\n\nMircea Florian , who studied in Germany with the Neokantian Rehmke , wrote about the history of philosophy and philosophical methodology, critique of the theory of knowledge, logic, datum and dodemenology, and the philosophy of recessivity. His results were published in the volume Philosophical Reconstruction (1943). He wrote in the 1960s a system of philosophy presented in a two-volume treatise called Recesivitatea ca structură a lumii ( Recessivity as the Structure of the World ). Inspired by an analogy with genetic biology, Florian arrives at the conclusion that experience is characterised by an invariant, the relation of recessivity that holds between two concepts. This relation is neither a relation of opposition, like the contrariety, nor one of concordance, like the subordination. It is a special relation which exhibits features of both types of inter-notional relation acknowledged by logic, and it is both a relation of subordination, and a relation of opposition. In a pair of concepts united by this relation, there is one which is hierarchically superior, called the \"dominant\" concept, and another which, although hierarchically inferior, is ontologically superior, called the \"recessive\" concept. Florian shows that every important concept of philosophy belongs to a pair which instantiates recessivity. He analyzed several dozens of such pairs for example multiple-one, or general-individual, writing for each term practically a micro-monograph. \n\nThe \"Ionescians\" grouped around their teacher and/or friend, Nae Ionescu (1890–1940). He earned his PhD in Germany, with a study on \"logistic\", i.e., in the terminology of the epoch, mathematical logic . He actually rejected mathematical logic, thinking it is reductive even in comparison to classical logic. His thinking on logic in general may be regarded as a form of intuitionism. He published only newspaper articles, where he held strongly conservative, reactionary views, and he quickly moved toward the extreme right. After his death, some of his students and associates (Noica, Amzăr, Eliade, Onicescu, Vulcănescu) published his various lectures on Logic, History of Logic, Epistemology (i.e. Theory of Knowledge) and on Metaphysics and The History of Metaphysics. His approach to the History of Philosophy is mostly typological, not chronological. Nae Ionescu's thought could be described overall as an existential philosophy of Christian authenticity, called \"Trăirism\" (from the verb \"a trăi\", to live), an autochthonous version of Existentialism influenced by vitalism and Orthodox theology. Many late commentators have accused him of \"plagiarism\", neglecting that he never wrote his lectures, not even lecture notes; Ionescu creatively improvised, and on many occasions one can recognise ideas initiated by Bergson, Scheler, Heidegger; his charisma was impressive, and students were completely captivated by the fact that he philosophised on the spot, in the course room, without preconceptions, giving interesting answers to issues they raised, and provoking a certain spiritual tension, with an impetus toward thinking on one's own. Because he was quite ironic, always disposed toward revising his thought and never wrote philosophy proper, his disciples compared him to Socrates.\n\nThe most important of his adherents were Mircea Vulcănescu (1904–1952), Mircea Eliade (1907–1986), Emil Cioran (1911–1995), Constantin Noica (1909–1987). Others like Petre Țuțea were also influenced by his personality, and philosophers like Alexandru Dragomir and Mihai Șora attended some of his courses.\n\nMircea Vulcănescu analysed in his seminal essay Dimensiunea românească a existenţei ( The Romanian Dimension of Existence ) the conceptual paradigm that serves as a means of evaluation of diverse philosophical visions by Romanians. By analyzing certain Romanian phrases, in what he calls a phenomenological manner, he claims to unravel the characteristics of Romanian existence: the feeling of a vast universal solidarity, a conviction that everything has a meaning and a purpose, a propension towards skepticism, volatility, and indetermination, and the belief in the duality \"this world\" vs \"the other world\". For example, from an analysis of the linguistic particularities of negation in the Romanian language, he deduces the Romanian ethos, with traits like fatalism or indifference regarding death, an easygoing attitude toward life, the conception that there is no alternative but also nothing irremediable. \n\nMircea Eliade, the well-known scholar of the history of religions, published a few essays showing the influence of his teacher Ionescu, but through these early works he brought nothing essentially new in the landscape of the Romanian philosophy. He was, however, a very important person in the intellectual landscape of the 1930s, another possible \"leader\" of a new generation.\n\nEmil Cioran, in his early books written in Romanian, proposed a philosophy of despair, shows a morbid obsession with death, all expressed in a deeply lyrical manner. He wrote mostly on nihilist themes of Nietzschean and Schopeanhaurean provenance, with some contemporary influences like Giovanni Papini and Nicolai Berdiaev.\n\nConstantin Noica debuted with an essay called Mathesis sau bucuriile simple ( Mathesis, or the Simple Joys ), a short consideration on the fulfilment of loneliness and cultural endeavors. His PhD thesis was called Schiţă pentru istoria lui Cum e cu putinţă ceva nou ( A Sketch for the History of How Something New May be Possible ). \n\nTransylvania produced between the Wars three remarkable thinkers: Lucian Blaga (1895–1961), D. D. Rosca (1895–1980), and Eugeniu Sperantia (1888–1972).\n\nLucian Blaga's philosophical system, called \"ekstatic intellectualism\" is a highly original construction, with roots in the philosophy of Kant, psychoanalysis , and Patristic philosophy. The system was projected in five monumental \"trilogies\", but only three were achieved and a fourth was partially elaborated. The trilogies are, in order: The Trilogy of Knowledge , The Trilogy of Culture , The Trilogy of Values , and The Cosmological Trilogy .\n\nThe metaphysical vision of Blaga centres around a mysterious metaphysical source or principle he called \"The Great Anonymous\", which creates the Universe indirectly, by mutilating the forms of existence that emanate from him, in order to avoid the possibility of the apparition of another Great Anonymous. The results of these acts of mutilation are infinitesimal fragments, structured in types, and called \"divine differentials\". The extant beings appear by the aggregation of these differentials. The speculative cosmology of Blaga also includes an entelechial interpretation of evolutionist biology.\n\nHis theory of knowledge asserts the existence of an \"unconscious spirit\" endowed with his own set of categories which double the Kantian categories of the conscious spirit. These categories of the unconscious prevent humans from completely revealing the mystery of existence, since all his knowledge must fit into this categorical framework. Thus, the Great Anonymous maintains an isolated \"centrality of existence\", because a complete knowledge would make the man godlike, but also infuses human activity with a creative tension. Blaga's metaphysical axiology also follows this conception. All categories encompass human powers of expression, and their dynamic influence is finally projected into values. In other words, what we can not overcome, we idolise. This \"finalist self-deluding\" repetitively ensures the creative destiny of mankind.\n\nAll human culture is according to Blaga the result of man's trying to reveal the mysteries of existence, it constitutes the man's being. Since man can not reveal completely the mysteries, because of the \"transcendent censure\" exerted by the unconscious categorial scheme, all his productions bear the mark of this dynamic framework. The totality of these categories at some point is called a \"stylistic matrix\", and they have the structure of a \"cosmoid\", that is of a small universe, i.e. a self-sufficient order. Thus, each culture is characterised by a style, in which different categories activate and wear off successively, until the complete exhaustion of the stylistic matrix. At that moment, the culture generated by the attempts of revelation within the respective stylistic matrix dies. This vision is inspired by, but significantly detached from the morphological theory of culture, as exposed by a Frobenius or a Spengler . Blaga discusses extensively, with many illustrations why all these theories missed the point.\n\nD. D. Rosca, who would later be the coordinator and translator of the series of complete works of Hegel into Romanian, arrived at a philosophical synthesis presented in his book Existenţa tragică ( The Tragic Existence ). It is a personal blend of existentialism , with roots in Kierkegaard , but influenced also by Hegel. His PhD thesis at the Sorbonne was L’influence de Hegel sur Taine, théoricien de la connaissance et de l’art ( The Influence of Hegel on Taine ), and his secondary thesis was the translation to French of Hegel's Life of Jesus . \n\nEugeniu Sperantia was a very prolific author. He began his list of publications with his PhD thesis, The Pragmatic Apriorism , a rethinking of Kant's Transcendental Analytic from a Pragmatist stand-point. He wrote subsequently on various subjects, like the biology from a Hegelian perspective, gaining a reputation especially in the field of the philosophy of right. He was a pioneer in the field of erotetic logic (the logic of interrogatives), which he called \"problematology\". A very interesting and most neglected work is his System of Metaphysics: Implicit in the Postulates of Any Possible Knowledge . We have here a theoretical innovation in metaphysics: Sperantia replaces the categorial theories of classical metaphysics with the analysis of the most general questions, analysis rendered possible by his problematology. Thus, the framework-theory of metaphysics becomes the logic of the interrogatives. Recently, his conception of metaphysics was compared to that of Collingwood .\n\nFrom the multitude of philosophical authors unaffiliated to the previous three currents we can mention here (almost randomly) Vasile Bancilă (1897–1979), Ionel Gherea , Anton Dumitriu (1905–1992) and Stéphane Lupasco (1900–1988).\n\nVasile Bancilă wrote two important commentaries on Blaga and Radulescu-Motru , and gave a valuable reply to Blaga's Mioritic Space , also called \"plai\", opposing what Bancilă called The Space of Bărăgan . Blaga's book maintained that the unconscious category of space which operates in the Romanian stylistic matrix was \"the space indefinitely wave-like\", an alternation on ups and downs, as a sinusoid. The name \"mioritical\" comes from \"miorița\", diminutive of sheep, i.e. an Ewe, the famous title of a popular ballad that is widely considered as quite relevant of the Romanian worldview, written in a peculiar alternating style. These are highly metaphorical and playful descriptions of a specific ethos common to significant cultural regions loosely related to a geographical space. Blaga also contends one may live in a plain but reflect a \"mioritic plai\" ethos, and that a specific ethos may become dominant even while it remains \"minor\" (the term is not loaded with value in Blaga's philosophy) and this \"style\" may absorb others while also being influenced by them. Bancilă on the other hand tried to show that Romanian culture as a whole does not reflect only a single \"abysmal\" category of space, the \"plai\" structure pointed out by Blaga, and he subsequently tried to show the existence of a \"Bărăgan space\" (Bărăgan is the name of the greatest plain in Romania); a space not determined by the alternating relief of hills or mountains, but by the flat plain.\n\nIonel Gherea , son of the noted Marxist sociologist Constantin Dobrogeanu-Gherea , published a book called Le moi et le monde. Essai d’une cosmogonie anthropomorphique ( The I and the World: Essay in Anthropomorphic Cosmogony ) which contains a discussion of the concept of personal identity. He postulates the existence of an original state of human being, called \"fictiv being\", a form of impersonal conscience, from which the World is built. \n\nAnton Dumitriu, mathematician by initial formation, obtained a PhD in philosophy then became the assistant of P. P. Negulescu. He was among the first philosophers in Romania interested in the philosophy of science, subject he treated in The Philosophical bases of Science . He introduces in Romania the latest mathematical logic, mostly by his works The New Logic and The Polyvalent Logic , where he presents the Russell – Whitehead axiomatic system of Principia Mathematica , and C.I. Lewis ' system of strict implication. Also, he researched intensively the problem of logical – semantic paradoxes, having the conviction that the solution to them was already available in the works of the Scholastic philosophers.\n\nStéphane Lupasco, renowned francophone philosopher of science, tried to lay the basis of a new epistemology, consonant with the then newly developed quantum mechanics. He advocated a logic of the included third, which conducted him to sustain the existence of third state, beyond matter and energy.\n\nIn the 1940s the mathematician Octav Onicescu conducted a seminar in philosophy of science at the University of Bucharest. Among the most important members of this group of scientific philosophy were fellow mathematicians Grigore Moisil and Dan Barbilian as well as other notorious scientists like Șerban Țițeica or Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen . They were engaged in foundational research, using mathematics as a formal instrument of conceptual analysis. Their results were published in the anthology The Problem of Determinism , or in some monographs as Onicescu's Principles of Scientific Knowledge , Georgescu-Roegen's The Statistical Method or P. Sergescu's Mathematical Thinking .\n\nWithin the first decade of totalitarianism, Romanian philosophical life was dominated by the persecution of all important interbellum philosophers. Lucretiu Patrascanu (1900–1954) was the author of a work, Currents and Tendencies in Romanian Philosophy , which will establish for decades the status of the Romanian philosophers. With mostly rudimentary means, over-simplifications, appealing to the \"Marxist-Leninist\" doctrine, Patrascanu polemicized with major philosophers as Blaga, Radulescu-Motru, Florian, Cioran and \"exposed\" them as idealists, irrationalists, mystics, bourgeois, imperialists and sometimes fascists. Among the local pseudo-Marxists a new star emerged quickly, Constantin I. Gulian (1914–2011), a member of the Romanian Academy since 1955 until his death. Gulian produced at the peak of his career several expositions of Hegelian philosophy, completely lacking any value. During these first decades, philosophy was taught in Universities by dentists or illiterate workers turned into professors virtually overnight: Following Stalin's death, hardcore communist dogma slowly lost some of its force.\n\nAfter 1964, the date of the great amnesty of all political prisoners, philosophical life had a chance to come back into existence, partly catalysed by the professional reinsertion of the relatively few surviving philosophers, who were either imprisoned or marginalized. Thus, we can distinguish several \"schools\" of philosophers: the interbellum school, the Păltiniș school and the Epistemological School of Bucharest. Independent figures existed, of course, mostly as university professors.\n\nThe name of \"school\" may be even more inappropriate in this case than it was before, when we spoke of Nae Ionescu 's school or of that of Titu Maiorescu . The Interbellum school should be seen in the same manner we speak of \"the old school\". The most important philosophers formed in the interbellum period, that could practice again philosophy, and remained significantly creative are: Mircea Florian , Constantin Noica , Anton Dumitriu , Mihai Șora (b. 1916), Petre Țuțea (1902–1991), Alexandru Dragomir (1916–2002).\n\nConstantin Noica became during this time, after his release from prison, a continental metaphysician of European dimensions, arguably one of the greatest of the late 20th century. His first book published after detention was 27 Steps of the Real in which he unifies three categorial systems, those of Plato, Aristotle, and Kant. Under a Hegelian, but maybe also influenced by Nicolai Hartmann, he thought that reality, divided in three realms, inorganic, organic and spiritual, is characterised by three distinct sets of categories. At the peak of this categorial ladder he put a new category, which reflects the impact that physics had on his thought: the undulation, or the wave, which became thus the supreme category.\n\nHe later developed the theory initiated by Vulcănescu , and wrote several books which brought him overnight celebrity, especially in literary circles. Books as Creation and Beauty in Romanian Speech , or The Romanian Sentiment of Being , masterpieces of etymological speculation and philosophical hermeneutics , have obviously limited universal value, of interest only to those researching Romanian spirituality per se. In these books Noica arrived at the conclusion that the Romanian language possesses a word, a preposition, which mediates its unique access to the realm of being. It is the preposition întru , which expresses the processuality of the being or what he calls \"the becoming in-towards (întru) Being\". This idiomatic preposition, of Latin provenance ( intro ) stands for more than a spatial inclusion: it indicates a going on, a movement both toward something, and within that something i.e. a movement of participation.\n\nHis ontology (more correctly called metaphysics) is edified without the idiomatic peculiarities in two later works, and consists of The Becoming in-to the Being and Letters on the Logic of Hermes , but it was incipient since Six Maladies of the Contemporary Spirit . In these works Noica shows how the monolithic unity of being is broken, and being displays three instances; The being of first instance is arrived at phenomenologically. As such, the being of things appears as a functional model, the structure Individual – Determinations – General (I-D-G), which the things are striving to realise. But the model of the being is rarely found realised like that; most currently it is incomplete, only two of the three terms being present. Thus, there are six incomplete, unsaturated formations, called by Noica \"ontological precariousness\" or \"maladies of being\" (or \"of the spirit\", in Six maladies... ). These maladies, schematically represented as I-G, G-I, I-D, D-I, D-G, and G-D, are what he calls the rule of the real. Then, the being of second instance is the \"element\", characterised as an individual-general, which is an entity that is not a particular, i.e. its conditions of identity do not make reference to a single spatio-temporal location. Something is an individual-general if it distributes itself without dividing. Like the Whiteheadian ingression, the \"distribution without dividing\" is a rethinking of the Platonic participation. A favourite exemplification of the nature of an element is for Noica the concept of biological species. The elements are characterised by different categories than the things, of a speculative nature, like unity-multiplicity-totality, reality-possibility-necessity. The being of the third instance, or the being qua being, is theorised in several pages of an incredible density, and in a language close to theology. Noica attempts to rethink here the problem of the one and the many, in a Parmenidean – Platonic style. He formulates as a criterion for being the same \"distribution without dividing\".\n\nMethodologically, Noica can be considered, paradoxically, an anti-Hegelian Hegelian. He revises Hegelian dialectics, accused explicitly by Noica of being dominated by the \"ethos of neutrality\". In Hegelian logic, Noica contends, Hegel himself must intervene in order to give the concepts the necessary impetus for their movement. They do not have in themselves the power to move dialectically. Noica considers that dialectics is circular and tetradic. The scheme thesis – antithesis – synthesis is replaced by him with the rival scheme theme – anti-theme – thesis – theme (refound). The spirit, Noica says, begins not with a thesis, but with a thematic horizon in which it moves, and into which it digs repeatedly, going more and more toward the intimacy of this horizon. Several of Noica's peculiar paradoxical concepts, which allow him to articulate his views on dialectics, are difficult to comprehend, and require much sympathy from the reader: \"the non-limiting limitation\", \"the opening closure\" etc.\n\nNoica's philosophy is also concerned with the problem of reason and the problem of the individual. He redefines reason as \"the conscience of the becoming in-to being\". The philosopher wanted to save the individual from \"the tyranny of the general\", to give to the individual an \"ontological dignity\". He was deeply disturbed by the image of the individual as a simple instance of something general, as a simple particular case of a general rule. But he also intended to maintain the reality of the general natures, not wanting to reduce them to mere collections or classes of individuals. Thus, he rejected both Platonic realism , and nominalism of all kinds. Instead of choosing between nominalism and realism, he proposes a third version, which insists on the solidarity existent between the individual and the general, linked by their determinations. His triangle I-D-G forms thus an irreducible unity, reminiscent of Peirce 's triad.\n\nConstantin Noica formed around him an unofficial school of philosophy, based at Păltiniș , a mountain location where he spent his last living years. Păltiniș became a place of pilgrimage for young Romanian intellectuals, who went there in search of a spiritual mentor. Noica became thus a kind of national institution with an influence unequalled by any other intellectual figure before or after him. He imposed to his disciples the intensive study of Greek and German, and he asked them to approach \"cultures\", not authors and certainly not isolated books. He had an effervescent activity of translation, initiating in collaboration with Petru Creția the integral edition of Plato in Romanian. He also translated from neo-Platonic Aristotelian commentators, Dexippus , Ammonius , Porphyry and others. He contributed to the translation of Kant's Critique of Judgement , and he translated from Chorydaleus, the Introduction to logic and the Commentary to Metaphysics . He himself wrote commentaries and interpretations of Plato, Aristotle, and Hegel, and encouraged the introduction of Heidegger 's writings. He was by far the most brilliant philosopher of post-war Romania.\n\nAnton Dumitriu continued after 1964 his initial preoccupations, publishing in the philosophy of mathematics and in the theory and history of logic. His monumental History of Logic , although a landmark of Romanian philosophy and of the discipline, suffered from notable shortcomings and had a rather bad reception in the West. Dumitriu included too much on some topics of his history, with chapters on the transcendental and dialectical logic , and too little on others, not treating many branches of recent logic, or treating them completely sketchily and insufficiently, as in the case of modal logic . Also, he was misinformed on issues concerning Scholastic philosophy. However, there are many parts of this work that are still valuable today.\n\nAnton Dumitriu wrote also a series of essays, more literary in style, which made him appreciated by the Romanian intellectual milieu, centered on literature. His book Philosophia Mirabilis is an essay on the esoteric dimension of the Greek philosophy, Eleatic Cultures and Heracleitean Cultures , a comparative essay in the philosophy of culture, and Aletheia , a study of the Greek meaning of truth and of philosophy, where he criticises Heidegger 's position in Introduction to Metaphysics .\n\nMihai Șora was a student of Nae Ionescu and Mircea Eliade , but younger than the members of the so-called '27 generation. He obtained in 1938 a bourse at the Sorbonne , where he went for preparing a thesis on Pascal . During wartime he wrote a book called On the Interior Dialogue , published only in 1947 at Gallimard , and well received by Jacques Maritain and Étienne Gilson . In this work Șora explores the problem of human authenticity, in an existential tone, but influenced greatly by Scholastic philosophy (notably that of Thomas Aquinas and Nicolaus Cusanus ) and by Marxism (he was a member of the French communist party and a member of the Résistance).\n\nIn 1948 he returned to Romania, and couldn't leave the country anymore. He did not publish anything until the end of the 70s, when he began a cycle of four books, containing a philosophical system, achieved only in 2005. During the communist regime he wrote and published three of the four books composing the cycle: The Salt of the Earth , To be, the do, to have and I & You & He & She or the Generalised Dialogue . His last book is called The Instant and the Time . His system consists of an ontology, a poetics, an ethics and a political philosophy, all deriving from an original \"ontological model\". The influences comes from Péguy , Pascal, the Scholastics and from Husserl . Șora considered himself ever since his first book as \"Cartesian of the utmost consequence\", i.e. a phenomenologist.\n\nHis concept of intentionality, crucial for the comprehension of his philosophy, was neither that of Brentano , nor that of Husserl, but an original one with deep roots in the Scholastic philosophy. In-tentio, derived from IN aliud TENDERE is the penetrating act of the spirit, which goes beyond the things into their origin, which is the Unum with his three transcendentals: Bonum, Verum and Pulchrum . Thus, there are three forms of intentionality, moral, theoretical and esthetical, characterising three types of human attitudes toward the world. The Unum is not viewed only as an actus purus, but rather as a \"universal potentiality of being\". As such, i.e. is placed, in Șora's metaphorical model, at the centre of a sphere of null radius, which has, thus, the same topos as the periphery. The surface of this sphere represents the pure exteriority, composed of \"terminal actualities\". The radius is the geometrical locus of the interiority, where we find the \"intermediary potentialities\".\n\nMihai Șora is considered the mentor of another \"school\", much more discrete and heterogeneous than the school of Noica, and there is currently an increasing interest in his work, especially from the young philosophers grouped around the Studia Phaenomonelogica philosophical review.\n\nPetre Țuțea had a PhD in Administrative Law. Before and during the Second World War he worked as a director in the Ministry of National Economy, and was known and appreciated by all members of the '27 generation as one of their own, even though he was a little older. He widely gained the reputation of a rhetorical genius, when he spoke everybody stood and listened. Some even considered him \"a leader of his generation\". Initially having youthful Marxist convictions, he developed right-wing nationalist sympathies, that would later lead to his arrest and conviction. In prison he rediscovered Christianity, and after his release he considered himself a Christian philosopher. Although due to his political antecedents and uncompromising content of philosophical ideas and religious faith Țuțea could not publish very much, he wrote a considerable amount, including a late work projected in five volumes, \"Problems, Systems, Styles, Sciences\" and finally \"Dogmas\". He completed the first two, and a small part of \"Styles\" and \"Dogmas\" – of which the first two volumes were published posthumously. \"The Philosophy of Nuances\" is also an important essay, a veritable manifesto for a new philosophy, dating back to 1969. Țuțea was influenced by a whole plethora of intellectual personalities, but mostly by Plato, Greek Skepticism, Leibniz, Nietzsche, Bergson, Simmel and the fictionalism of Hans Vaihinger . The only significant Romanian philosophical influences were Lucian Blaga and Nae Ionescu . Theologically, he was under the sway of St. Paul , Augustine and later Thomas Aquinas , while he also knew and admired the major contemporary Romanian theologian, Fr. Dumitru Stăniloae , whom he met in prison. Țuțea also appreciated various thinkers like Werner Sombart , and frequently refers to scientists like Heisenberg and Poincaré.\n\nInitially Țuțea rejected the categories of Western idealism, replacing the Kantian conceptual framework with a spectrum of empirical-phenomenological nuances. His later philosophy, as he declares, is an effort of \"theologal\" (not theological) thinking. He argues that Truth is unique, but human reason cannot find it by itself, although it can be a receptacle of truth. Thus, in order to really know the truth, man needs inspiration and revelation. Man is never autonomous, and all intellectual efforts like science or philosophy are only means of producing fictions, at the level of material and cultural comfort. Țuțea believed that science and philosophy by themselves don't even have a consoling function, being essentially irrelevant with respect to the most dramatic issues, like death. Thus, only religion (specifically, Christianity) possesses the truth and bears relevance to the destiny of humankind. Without it, he says, man is just \"a rational animal that comes from nowhere and doesn't go anywhere\". Anthropologically, Țuțea analyzed what he calls \"Christian man\"; the anthropological model to be pursued is that of the saint.\n\nȚuțea was undoubtedly an unusual, Socratic figure, in the sense of a major, exemplary personality, and his writing style is quite peculiar. His various writings are hardly classifiable, and even though he never finished whatever he started, after his release from prison Țuțea elaborated at least three original literary-philosophical styles: The Philosophy of Nuances, Theatre as Seminar and Religious-theologal Reflections. One of Țuțea's singular features, the so-called \"substantivization\" of predicates, related to his manner of writing sentences without verbs, as well as the many resonant repetitions he calls \"leit-motifs\" and constant nuancing of terms, coupled with a rejection of systems and the absence of philosophical speculation stuns most critics, who have no idea what to make of this unusual manner of thinking and writing, in a cultural environment mostly dominated by belletristic writing or academic exegesis. The Romanian public came to know his personality only after 1989, when several interviews of Țuțea, who was 89 years old were broadcast on TV and gained the admiration of a broad audience.\n\nThe subsequent publication of a collection of aphorisms gathered from interviews became a best seller, while his major writings are still not very well known or appreciated, although Țuțea was always surrounded by friends who typed and multiplied his manuscripts. Neighbours usually called him \"Professor\", because he always seemed to lecture, but as he ironically pointed out, his legendary tenured \"chair\" was under the blue sky, in the campus of Cișmigiu – a central park in Bucharest, very close to his studio apartment. Several of his close friends and companions such as Mircea Eliade , Emil Cioran , Petre Pandrea , later Marcel Petrișor , Aurel-Dragoș Munteanu and from the younger generation Radu Preda and Alexandru Popescu are also accomplished philosophers, writers and scholars.\n\nAlexandru Dragomir is a late discovery of the Romanian public, actively promoted by the Humanitas Publishing House (led by Gabriel Liiceanu), which edited some of his notebooks. Dragomir, a former doctoral student of Heidegger , was a reticent man who wrote secretly and never intended to publish anything. In his old days he began giving private seminaries, which he carried on until his death; only a very narrow group of intellectuals attended. After he died several loosely thematic notebooks were found, proving that Dragomir was a phenomenologist of great class. Among these manuscripts, whose publication is not finished, there are several with reflections on time, which form the most consistent part of his thought. The influence of Dragomir on Romanian philosophy is still developing. Studia Phaenomenologica dedicated one of its issues to him.\n\nConstantin Noica was in a continuous search for the gifted young philosophers, which he discovered and trained. Among these (at that time) young men, there are several which have manifested themselves in the philosophical and literary, or rather literary-philosophical Romanian environment. Such are Gabriel Liiceanu (b. 1942), Andrei Pleșu (b. 1948), Sorin Vieru (b. 1933), Andrei Cornea (b. 1952), Vasile Dem. Zamfirescu , Alexandru Surdu (b. 1938) and Corneliu Mircea .\n\nGabriel Liiceanu grew to prominence after he published The Păltiniș Diary , where he described his paideic adventure under Noica's guidance. It was also the book that transformed Noica into a sort of philosophical star. The Diary is perhaps the most influent Romanian philosophical publication of the late 1980s, initiating a fascination of younger generations with Păltiniș, and encouraging the study ancient Greek, Latin and German as prerequisites for the serious study of philosophy. Liiceanu's own philosophical project initially centered around the idea of \"limit\", and he therefore called his hermeneutic inquiry into the nature and history of this concept \"peratology\" (from the Greek peras = limit). This program initiated with The Tragic. A Phenomenology of Limit and Overcoming , his PhD thesis, where he lays much accent on Nietzsche , and accomplished with On Limit , the final and more general expression of his peratology. On Limit touches on various topics such as of liberty, destiny, responsibility, encounter with the other, in a framework basically Heideggerian . Liiceanu also accomplished the translation of Heidegger into Romanian.\n\nAndrei Pleșu was first known as an art historian, but also as a subtle philosopher. He avows being more interested in the \"light\" side of philosophy, as he had a \"respectful antipathy\" towards Aristotle, and considered that he had absolutely no use for Hegel. He oriented himself toward ethics and the philosophy of religion. His focal idea is that of the \"interval\", the in-between of existence, as a space of itinerancy. Plesu wrote one of the very few Romanian treatises of ethics, Minima Moralia , which is subtitled \"an ethics of the interval\". It begins by affirming that only the man in the condition of itinerancy has moral competence, needing to make choices at every step of the way. Thus, true ethics is not a major one of the great problems and puzzles, but a minor ethics of the quotidian life and of ordinary situations. Further on, he explored the theme of the interval in his On Angels , a book of angelology, arising at the intersection between metaphysics and the philosophy of religion. In this book, the entities called angels are analysed as a cases of \"beings of the interval\". The entire exercise has thus the secondary value of ontology of the interval.\n\nSorin Vieru is one of the few Păltiniș logicians. He established his reputation by his researches on the classical syllogistic, which he axiomatised. He was also a specialist in Frege , from whom he translated abundantly. His interests covered also Greek philosophy, mostly Plato's political philosophy. He translated several of Plato's most difficult dialogues. Finally, he published an essay on The Risk of Thinking , in collaboration with the mathematician Uther Morgenstern, alias Terente Robert.\n\nAndrei Cornea is a specialist in the ancient Greek philosophy and also a political thinker. During the communist regime he published little in the domain of philosophy, but he translated Plato's Republic . After 1989 he published intensively. Thus, we can cite his interpretation to Plato from Plato. Philosophy and Censorship , his interesting rehabilitation of the points of view sophistically rejected by Plato's Socrates from When Socrates is not Right , or his proposing of replacing the concept of utopia with that of ek-topia, as opposed to en-topia, in From the School of Athens to the School of Paltinis . But perhaps his most important contribution is the valuable critique of contemporary relativism from The Khazar Tournament . He translated Aristotle's Metaphysics and a great part of Plotinus 's Enneads .\n\nVasile Dem. Zamfirescu's main interests are in psychoanalysis . Therefore, his philosophy bears the marks of these interests. He wrote a book on The Logic of the Heart and the Logic of the Mind , well liked by Noica, and after 1989 he published his Philosophy of the Unconscious (2 volumes), exploring the philosophical potential of the psychoanalytical idea of unconscious.\n\nAlexandru Surdu was one of the earliest collaborators on Noica, but in a great measure independent. He specialised initially in logic, publishing books on Intuitionism and Intuitionist logic . He also studied the Aristotelian logic, thus arriving to his The Theory of Pre-judicative Forms , a rethinking of the categories with the means of formal logic. After 1989 he published on the Romanian philosophy and speculative philosophy. Notable volumes are The Pentamorphosis of the Art and The Speculative Philosophy . Alexandru Surdu is, like Noica, an anti-Hegelian Hegelian. Thus, he criticises Hegel for his \"absolutisation\" of triadic dialectics, he criticises also Noica for absolutising the tetradic dialectics, while proposing his version of a pentadic dialectics. He maintains, though, that diverse experiential realms are to be investigated by diverse dialectics, binary, triadic, tetradic or pentadic. His philosophy continues the long-time discredited epistemology of the faculties, which he complicates by speaking of five faculties of thinking. Thus, we have: intellect, rational intellect, reason, speculative reason, and speculation. The categories of the systematic philosophy, as determined by Surdu, are also five: Transcendence/Subsistence, Being, Existence, Real Existence, and Reality. Surdu was one of the translators of Wittgenstein 's Tractatus into Romanian and he translated also from Kant.\n\nCorneliu Mircea is a psychiatrist and also a philosopher, encouraged by Noica, but not actually one of his disciples. Still, his interests, themes, and style, places him in the Păltiniș circle, where he paid visits regularly. He published quite consistently. During communism he gave, among other publications, The Book of Being , Being and Consciousness , Discourse on Being , and after 1989 he published (among other things) The Originary , Being and Ek-stasis , The Making. A Treatise on Being . Influenced by Hegel and by Sartre , his philosophy is an inquiry into the meaning of being, commencing with nothingness, in an attempt of rethinking both Hegel's Logic and Sartre's Being and Nothingness . He cultivates a deliberate literary expression, maintaining that the philosophical discourse must have two sides, one conceptually objective, the other subjective, aesthetic, persuasive. Lately, Corneliu Mircea seems close to some form of mystical philosophy.\n\nFollowing the examples of Anton Dumitriu , Grigore Moisil or Octav Onicescu , several teachers at the University of Bucharest oriented themselves toward epistemology and the philosophy of science, which due to its technical nature lacked ideological control and interference. After the demise of the communism, they continued their preoccupations, but also wrote on many other subjects. The protagonists of this school were Mircea Flonta (b. 1932), Ilie Parvu (b. 1941), Vasile Tonoiu (b. 1941), and Marin Turlea (b. 1940).\n\nMircea Flonta wrote a valuable monograph on the theme of the analytic/synthetic distinction in contemporary philosophy, and a study on the Philosophical Presuppositions of the Exact Sciences . He can be considered the first analytical philosopher in Romania, understanding philosophy as a critical study of presuppositions. His activity continued after 1989 and diversified, as he approached such themes as the perception of philosophy in the Romanian culture. Among his perennial interests are the philosophy of Kant (he translated from Kant and wrote a book on him) and that of Wittgenstein (likewise, he translated several of his books and published a book on his philosophy).\n\nIlie Parvu is an epistemologist, philosopher of science, metaphysician and interpreter of Kant. His Introduction to Epistemology was the first book of this kind who had a European level, after the period in which the only epistemology was the Marxist–Leninist \"gnoseology\". It is still the best autochthon introduction available. His studies in the philosophy of science ( The Scientific Theory , The Semantics and the Logic of Science ) laid accent mostly on the contemporary formal instruments of analysis of the scientific theories. Parvu can be considered as belonging to the structuralist current in the philosophy of science, following J. Sneed, W. Stegmüller, C. U. Moulines, W. Balzer etc.\n\nThe structuralist analysis of theories was applied by Ilie Parvu in the domain of the reconstruction of some crucial philosophical works, like the Tractatus of Wittgenstein or the Critique of Pure Reason .\n\nAs a metaphysician, Parvu published the two-volume The Architecture of Existence . In the first volume he analyses the structural-generative paradigm in ontology. He conceives of an ontological theory as having an abstract-structural core, which generates its applications not by direct instantiation, but by restrictions and specialisations of this core, which evolves at the same time with the application. Professor Parvu analysed also the theories capable of furnishing decisive mediations between the structural abstraction of the nucleus and the world of empirical evidence . In the second volume he analysed the contemporary analytic metaphysics, the great ontological contemporary constructive programs, as that of Carnap or Quine, as well as diverse local metaphysics, like that of dispositions, powers, the ontologies of events, and different theories of the individual. He presented also important discussions concerning the metaontology, constructional apparatus, style and techniques in recent metaphysics.\n\nVasile Tonoiu was interested mostly in continental philosophy of science, translating Poincaré , Gonseth , Bachelard , and writing monographs on Gonseth and Bachelard. He also published a book on Morin 's epistemological vision of complexity. Another chief interest of Tonoiu's is the dialogic philosophy, or the philosophy of dialogue . He wrote also an excellent book on Mircea Eliade , Archaic Ontologies in Actuality .\n\nMarin Turlea dedicated his career to the philosophy of mathematics. His work on The Philosophy and the Foundations of Mathematics traces a distinction between the foundational and the foundationist research in mathematics, i.e. between mathematicians' own research on its foundations, and the philosophical research of the foundations of the mathematics. In this book he soundly establishes the possibilities, sphere of action and relevance of the philosophical study of mathematics. Following the lines of the program indicated in this first work, Turlea will elaborate a Philosophy of Mathematics , more like a history of the philosophical problems connected with systems of mathematics, from Plato and Proclus to Principia Mathematica . He analyzes the metaphysics of mathematical entities in his Existence and Truth in Mathematics , and he studies Wittgenstein 's philosophy (or rather anti-philosophy) of mathematics.\n\nIn Romania Marxism did not produce any notable philosophers. The only Marxist philosopher of any importance born in Romania, Lucien Goldman , flourished in France. Within the mass of ideologists with philosophical pretensions, several figures detach though as honest philosophers.\n\nThis is the case of Athanase Joja (1904–1972), logician and interpreter of the ancient philosophy, with contributions to Marxist \"dialectical logic\". He founded the Romanian Academy's Institute of Logic, where many interbellic philosophers, including Noica, were reinserted professionally. \n\nAnother Marxist figure was Henri Wald (1920–2002), whose thinking was a mixture of French Structuralism and Marxism, and who wrote also an Introduction to the Dialectical Logic .\n\nIon Ianoși (b. 1928) is a Marxist philosopher from a different class, closer to literature, being for many years the secretary of the literary critique section of the Union of the Writers from Romania. He published a trilogy on the aesthetical category of the sublime, a volume on Hegel and the Art and many others, among which a study of the Romanian philosophy in its relation with literature, Philosophy and Literature .\n\nAfter the Revolution from 1989, the philosophy in Romania began rapidly to synchronize with the Western contemporary philosophy.\n\nThus, phenomenology is represented especially by two groups, one from Cluj , with Virgil Ciomoș and Ion Copoeru as main characters, the other from Bucharest, developed as a consequence of Liiceanu's influence. This later group includes the editors of Studia Phaenomenologica , Cristian Ciocan and Gabriel Cercel , and the Heideggerians like Catalin Cioaba or Bogdan Minca . Virgil Ciomoș published phenomenological interpretations of Aristotle and Kant, while Copoeru is a Husserlian scholar.\n\nPost-modernism in Romanian philosophy has as recent notable exponents such as Ciprian Mihali and Bogdan Ghiu . Although Mihali is more interested in the phenomenological analysis of the quotidian, his thinking is deeply rooted in French post-Structuralism. Ghiu, through his translations on Deleuze and various essays spread the influence of postmodern and poststructuralist French philosophy in Romania, although it remains rather subdued, without any mature philosophers.\n\nAnalytic philosophy has developed mostly at the University of Bucharest, by such names as Mircea Dumitru , Adrian-Paul Iliescu , Adrian Miroiu , Valentin Mureșan , Mihail-Radu Solcan . Mircea Dumitru wrote on philosophical logic, the philosophy of language and the philosophy of mind. Iliescu is a political philosopher (liberalism and conservatism), but also has interests in the philosophy of language, publishing a book on Wittgenstein. Adrian Miroiu published works in the fields of modal logic, philosophy of science and political philosophy. More recently, after joining the National School of Political Science and Public Administration, he has moved to other fields which are intimately related to political science, such as social choice theory , rational choice theory, electoral competition, public policies and educational policies. Valentin Muresan works in the field of ethics, cultivating the philosophical commentary. He published commentaries of Plato, Aristotle, and Mill . Professor Solcan contributed to the development of the philosophy of mind in Romania, publishing an introduction to the philosophy of mind form the perspective of the cognitive sciences.\n\nA philosopher intellectually affiliated to the interbellic tradition, very close to the members of the Păltiniș school, who also attended some of Dragomir's seminars is Horia-Roman Patapievici . He was saluted by Liiceanu as a \"Romanian Kierkegaard \" for his first published essays, but later had to bear the unfair weight of this exaggerated remark. His most ambitious book to date is on The Recent Man, or What is lost when Something is won . In this essay of cultural and political philosophy Patapievici develops a conservative critique of late modernity, of vast scope and unequal pertinence, making him however the most notable contemporary Romanian liberal-conservative thinker. More recently his thinking seems to have adopted some libertarian influences.\n\nProfessor Ștefan Aloroaei from the University of Iași is a specialist in hermeneutics. The books that made his reputation are The Negative Reason. Historico-symbolic Scenarios and How is Philosophy in Eastern Europe Possible? . He published also Our Metaphysics of All Days , where he tries to hermeneutically investigate the metaphysica naturalis implicit in the ordinary intercourse of the commonsense with the world.\n\nFinally, many university philosophers, mostly exponents of a continental style, continue the interbellic tradition of the Jack-of-all-trades philosophers, producing mostly works of history of the philosophy and of philosophical hermeneutics.",
  "Ed Arno (July 17, 1916 – May 27, 2008) was an Austrian-American cartoonist , caricaturist, illustrator and comics artist, contributing to The New Yorker from 1969 to 2001. He was born in Innsbruck , Austria , before moving to the United States. His work appeared in Aventurile lui Drix, Licurici, Luminita , The New York Times , Saturday Review , Cosmopolitan , and Harvard Business Review . His books The Magic Fish and The Gingerbread Man were set to music by Arthur Rubinstein . In 1998, he published a collection of his work, Ed Arno’s Most Wanted . ",
  "Manhwa ( Korean : 만화 ; Hanja : 漫畵 ; Korean pronunciation: [manβʷa] ) is the general Korean term for comics and print cartoons . Outside Korea, the term usually refers to Korean comics. \n\nModern Manhwa has extended its reach to many other countries. These comics have branched outside of Korea by access to Webtoons and have created an impact that has resulted in some movie, drama and television show adaptations.\n\nThe author or artist of a manhwa is called a manhwaga ( 만화가 ; 漫畫家 ). They take on the task of creating a comic that fits a certain format. Manhwa is read in the same direction as English books, horizontally and from left to right, because Korean is normally written and read horizontally. It can also be written and read vertically from right to left, top to bottom. Webtoons tend to be structured differently in the way they are meant for scrolling where manga is meant to be looked at page by page. Manhwa , unlike their manga counterpart, is often in color when posted on the internet, but in black & white when in a printed format. \n\nManhwa art differs from manga and manhua as well with its distinct features. The bodies of characters are often realistically proportioned, while the faces remain unrealistic. Manhwas also often have very detailed clothing on their characters as well as intricate backgrounds. Webtoons use vertical scrolling to their advantage to demonstrate movement or the passage of time. Manhwa webtoons are also recognized for having simplified dialogue compared to print. \n\nLinguistically, manhwa , manga ( 漫画 ) and manhua ( 漫画 ) all mean 'comics' in Korean , Japanese and Chinese respectively. Manga comes from the Japanese word 漫画, ( katakana : マンガ ; hiragana : まんが ) which is composed of two kanji 漫 (man) meaning 'whimsical or impromptu' and 画 (ga) meaning 'pictures'. The same term is the root of the Korean word for comics, 'manhwa', and the Chinese word 'manhua'. The Korean manhwa , the Japanese manga and the Chinese phrase manhua are cognates ( transl. \"impromptu sketches\" ) and their histories and influences intertwine with each other.\n\nOriginally the term manhua in Chinese vocabulary was an 18th-century term used in Chinese literati painting . The term manga ( 漫画 ) was used in Japan to mean \"comics\" in the late 19th century, when it became popular. Since then, manhua ( 漫画 ) and manhwa ( 만화 ; 漫畫 ) have also come to mean 'comics' in Chinese and Korean respectively. [ citation needed ]\n\nAlthough in a traditional sense, the terms manga/ manhua / manhwa had a similar meaning of comical drawing broadly, in English the terms manhwa and manhua generally designate the manga-inspired comic strips. Manhwaga were not culturally isolated, and the influx of manga into the Korean comics market had a strong effect on the art and content of many artists' manhwa . \n\nThe term manhwa came into popular use in Korea during the 1920s, when it was applied to cartoons. By the mid 1920s, most newspapers were shut down, and political and social cartoons were abandoned, replaced by humorous illustrations and cartoons geared towards children.\n\nPolitical cartoon slowly reemerged following the establishment of the Republic of Korea (commonly known as South Korea) in 1948. Popular artist Kim Yong-hwan started Korea's first comic magazine, Manhwa Haengjin , in 1948, but it was quickly shut down because the authorities disapproved of the cover.\n\nDuring the Korean war, Manhwa was used with the aim of boosting the morale of the public, however there was also doctrine and propaganda on some manhwa leaflets and books, for example was \"Hong Gil Dong\" . The popularity of comics rose during the 1950s and 1960s, creating diversity of styles and subject matter which led to the construction of new genres such as sunjeong (or soonjung), stories containing romance that are aimed at young women. Also around this time another more humorous genre, myeongnyang or happy comics had become popular in order to counteract gritty ones. Manhwabang (lit. comics room), comics cafés and stores that allowed readers to pay a set rate to sit and read comics were also introduced to the public, creating a positive atmosphere around the comics. The 1950s also saw the influx of Japanese comics and the rise of illegal copying. A notable example was the unauthorized Korean version of the Japanese comic Shonen Kenya ( 少年ケニヤ ) . Produced by Busan publishers, this became a model for later Korean pirated comics. These pirated works often obscured or replaced Japanese creators' names with Korean ones, leading many readers to be unaware they were reading unauthorized copies. \n\nIn response to the increasing publication of comics, as well as social and political changes within South Korea, the government began to enforce censorship laws and, by the mid-1960s, created a comics distribution monopoly that further censored manhwa . Then the changing courses of manhwa history occurred during times of Manhwa Revolution when the authorities formed many commissions many times who oversees manhwa publications as well as community movements in order to suppress manhwa fanaticism among childrens and in order to address parents' concerns. Meanwhile, the severance of diplomatic ties with Japan meant pirated Japanese comics escaped censorship, flooding the market. \n\nIn the 1970s, sci-fi comics like Robot Taekwon V, influenced by Japan's Mazinger Z, gained popularity. Pirated versions of Candy Candy and The Rose of Versailles also appeared, significantly influencing later Korean romance comics. \n\nAround this time was when Manhwa had come up in North Korea as well. Then in the early 2000s, the majority of Manhwa was transferred to online sources due to economic collapse that South Korea had experienced at the end of the millennium. The online publication of Manhwa significantly increased its popularity outside Korea. This led to the South Korean search portal to launch LINE Webtoon, a platform for distributing online Manhwa.\n\nThe term \"Webtoon\" ( 웹툰 ) is a portmanteau of the Korean words 웹 meaning web and 카툰 meaning cartoon. The term was first coined on 8 August 2000, by Chollian, one of South Korea's oldest and now discontinued internet service engines. Webtoons are the digital form of manhwa that first came into popularity in the early 2000s due to their free access and availability on the internet. It was also beneficial to creators because it helped them get around strict South Korean censorship laws. Webtoons encourage amateur writers to publish their own stories for others to read. Since their creation, webtoons have gained popularity around the globe and have even been adopted outside of Korea as another form of comic publication. This is credited to their unique format and pay model.\n\nIn 2014 WEBTOON 's global website and mobile app were launched, revolutionizing the comic world's way of reading for entertainment. Also, around this time JunKoo Kim, the person that started LINE Webtoon, had reported that Webtoon was used in 60 countries, had 55 million monthly users, and 100 billion annual views. [ citation needed ]\n\nManhwa has reached all over the world now. With websites such as Toptoon, a webtoon company from Korea that also has a global service in DayComcis (former ToptoonPlus), people are able to access a wide variety of comics from their phones. There are also places like WEBTOON that not only allow people to read original comics, but make them as well, opening up this aspect of Korean culture for everyone to take part in.\n\nBut despite that, the relative obscurity of Korean culture in the Western world has caused the word manhwa to remain somewhat unknown in the English-speaking countries. [ citation needed ] English translations of manhwa have achieved success by targeting the manga and anime community, to the extent that manhwa were marketed as manga by the American publisher Tokyopop . \n\nSanho Kim was the first manhwa artist working in the States. During the 1960s and 1970s, he worked for publishers Charlton Comics , Warren Publishing , Iron Horse Publishing, Skywald Publications , DC Comics , and Marvel Comics . \n\nAccording to journalist Paul Gravett , in 1987 Eastern Comics published the first original manhwas in the United States. \n\nDue to the explosion of manga's popularity in the Americas, many of the licensed titles acquired for the American market seek to emulate the popular elements of other successful series. Recently, long-running webtoons serialized via Internet portal sites (e.g. by Daum Media), like Lezhin Comics and personal homepages have become both the creative and popular destination among the younger generation in Korea. [ citation needed ] With manga proving to be both popular and commercially successful in Europe and the United States, a number of publishers imported and translated manhwa titles in the hope of reaching the same audience. The readability and left-to-right orientation of manhwa contributed to its growing popularity, as did the realism of the characters and the combination of Eastern and Western styles and mythologies.\n\nAnimations based on Korean comics are still relatively rare (though there were several major hits in the late 1980s and early 90s with titles such as Dooly the Little Dinosaur and Fly! Superboard ). However, live-action drama series and movie adaptations of manhwa have occurred more frequently in recent years. Full House in 2004 and Goong (\"Palace\" or \"Princess Hours\") in 2006 are prominent examples. Below is a list of manhwa titles adapted into television series, web series, films, etc. Not to be confused to another adapted works of adapted from Webtoons .\n\nNote: select publishers only",
  "Mummy portraits or Fayum mummy portraits are a type of naturalistic painted portrait on wooden boards attached to upper class mummies from Roman Egypt . They belong to the tradition of panel painting , one of the most highly regarded forms of art in the Classical world . The Fayum portraits are the only large body of art from that tradition to have survived. They were formerly, and incorrectly, called Coptic portraits .\n\nMummy portraits have been found across Egypt, but are most common in the Faiyum Basin , particularly from Hawara and the Hadrianic Roman city Antinoopolis . \"Faiyum portraits\" is generally used as a stylistic, rather than a geographic, description. While painted cartonnage mummy cases date back to pharaonic times, the Faiyum mummy portraits were an innovation dating to the time of Roman rule in Egypt . The portraits date to the Imperial Roman era , from the late 1st century BC or the early 1st century AD onwards. It is not clear when their production ended, but some research suggests the middle of the 3rd century. They are among the largest groups among the very few survivors of the panel painting tradition of the classical world, which continued into Byzantine , Eastern Mediterranean, and Western traditions in the post-classical world, including the local tradition of Coptic Christian iconography in Egypt.\n\nThe portraits covered the faces of bodies that were mummified for burial. Extant examples indicate that they were mounted into the bands of cloth that were used to wrap the bodies. Almost all have now been detached from the mummies. They usually depict a single person, showing the head, or head and upper chest, viewed frontally. In terms of artistic tradition, the images clearly derive more from Greco-Roman artistic traditions than Egyptian ones . Two groups of portraits can be distinguished by technique: one of encaustic (wax) paintings, the other in tempera . The former are usually of higher quality.\n\nAbout 900 mummy portraits are known at present. The majority were found in the necropolis of Faiyum. Due to the hot dry Egyptian climate, the paintings are frequently very well preserved, often retaining their brilliant colours seemingly unfaded by time.\n\nThe Italian explorer Pietro Della Valle , on a visit to Saqqara - Memphis in 1615, was the first European to discover and describe mummy portraits. He was conducting excavations when a merchant came to his tent one night and claimed to have a mummy to sell, but that it had to remain a secret from the other locals. Della Valle described the discovery in his 1650 travelogue: \n\n\"They made us walk over a mile or two, and it seemed to me we were travelling very far to find what he, pointing with his finger, kept saying was 'just here, just here,' and 'very close.' Finally we arrived at a spot where, near to an excavated well that they said had been discovered by him two or three days before, he drew forth a mummy from some sand under which he had it hidden: the entire body of a dead man which, being for the most part well preserved and most curiously adorned and neat, seemed to me very beautiful and elegant. It could be seen to be a large naked man, though he was tightly bound and wrapped in a great quantity of linen cloths ... These cloth bindings and bundles immediately brought to my mind the story of the raising of Lazarus who obviously appeared like this. ... What is of interest is that on the top part of the body, flattened like the lid of a chest from so much binding, was painted the effigy of a youthful man, and from head to foot his garment was adorned with so many bits and pieces of pictures and gold, with so many hieroglyphics and characters and similar fanciful decorations, that, believe me, it was the most graceful thing imaginable.\"\n\nDella Valle purchased the mummy from the man, along with the mummy of a woman found in the same well, for a total of six piastres . He transported them to Europe and they are now both in the Albertinum ( Staatliche Kunstsammlungen Dresden ).\n\nAlthough interest in ancient Egypt steadily increased after that period, further finds of mummy portraits did not become known before the early 19th century. The provenance of these first new finds is unclear; they may come from Saqqara as well, or perhaps from Thebes . In 1820, the Baron of Minotuli acquired several mummy portraits for a German collector, but they became part of a whole shipload of Egyptian artifacts lost in the North Sea . In 1827, Léon de Laborde brought two portraits, supposedly found in Memphis, to Europe, one of which can today be seen at the Louvre , the other in the British Museum . Ippolito Rosellini , a member of Jean-François Champollion 's 1828–29 expedition to Egypt, brought a further portrait back to Florence . It is so similar to de Laborde's specimens that it is thought to be from the same source. During the 1820s, the British Consul General to Egypt, Henry Salt , sent several further portraits to Paris and London. Some of them were long considered portraits of the family of the Theban Archon Pollios Soter, a historical character known from written sources, but this has turned out to be incorrect. \n\nOnce again, a long period elapsed before more mummy portraits came to light. In 1887, Daniel Marie Fouquet heard of the discovery of numerous portrait mummies in a cave. He set off to inspect them some days later, but arrived too late, as the finders had used the painted plaques for firewood during the three previous cold desert nights. Fouquet acquired the remaining two of what had originally been fifty portraits. While the exact location of this find is unclear, the likely source is from er-Rubayat. At that location, not long after Fouquet's visit, the Viennese art trader Theodor Graf found several further images, which he tried to sell as profitably as possible. He engaged the famous Egyptologist Georg Ebers to publish his finds. He produced presentation folders to advertise his individual finds throughout Europe. Although little was known about their archaeological find contexts, Graf went as far as to ascribe the portraits to known Ptolemaic pharaohs by analogy with other works of art, mainly coin portraits. None of these associations were particularly well argued or convincing, but they gained him much attention, not least because he gained the support of well-known scholars like Rudolf Virchow . As a result, mummy portraits became the centre of much attention. By the late 19th century, their very specific aesthetic made them sought-after collection pieces, distributed by the global arts trade.\n\nIn parallel, more scientific engagement with the portraits was beginning. In 1887, the British archaeologist Flinders Petrie started excavations at Hawara . He discovered a Roman necropolis which yielded 81 portrait mummies in the first year of excavation. At an exhibition in London, these portraits drew large crowds. In the following year, Petrie continued excavations at the same location but now suffered from the competition of a German and an Egyptian art dealer. Petrie returned in the winter of 1910–11 and excavated a further 70 portrait mummies, some of them quite badly preserved. With very few exceptions, Petrie's studies still provide the only examples of mummy portraits so far found as the result of systematic excavation and published properly. Although the published studies are not entirely up to modern standards, they remain the most important source for the find contexts of portrait mummies.\n\nIn 1892, the German archaeologist von Kaufmann discovered the so-called \" Tomb of Aline \", which held three mummy portraits; among the most famous today. Other important sources of such finds are at Antinoöpolis and Akhmim . The French archaeologist Albert Gayet worked at Antinoöpolis and found much relevant material, but his work, like that of many of his contemporaries, does not satisfy modern standards. His documentation is incomplete, many of his finds remain without context.\n\nToday, mummy portraits are represented in all important archaeological museums of the world. Many have fine examples on display, notably the British Museum , the National Museum of Scotland , the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York and the Louvre in Paris. Because they were mostly recovered through inappropriate and unprofessional means, virtually all are without archaeological context, a fact which consistently lowers the quality of archaeological and culture-historical information they provide. As a result, their overall significance as well as their specific interpretations remain controversial. \n\nA majority of images show a formal portrait of a single figure, facing and looking toward the viewer, from an angle that is usually slightly turned from full face. The figures are presented as busts against a monochrome background which in some instances are decorated. The individuals are both male and female and range in age from childhood to old age.\n\nThe majority of preserved mummy portraits were painted on boards or panels, made from different imported hardwoods, including oak , lime , sycamore , cedar , cypress , fig , and citrus . The wood was cut into thin rectangular panels and made smooth. The finished panels were set into layers of wrapping that enclosed the body and were surrounded by bands of cloth, giving the effect of a window-like opening through which the face of the deceased could be seen. Portraits were sometimes painted directly onto the canvas or rags of the mummy wrapping ( cartonnage painting).\n\nThe wooden surface was sometimes primed for painting with a layer of plaster. In some cases the primed layer reveals a preparatory drawing.\nTwo painting techniques were employed: encaustic (wax) painting and animal glue tempera . The encaustic images are striking because of the contrast between vivid and rich colours, and comparatively large brush-strokes, producing an \" Impressionistic \" effect. The tempera paintings have a finer gradation of tones and chalkier colours, giving a more restrained appearance. In some cases, gold leaf was used to depict jewellery and wreaths. There also are examples of hybrid techniques or of variations from the main techniques.\n\nThe Fayum portraits reveal a wide range of painterly expertise and skill in presenting a lifelike appearance. The naturalism of the portraits is often revealed in knowledge of anatomic structure and in skilled modelling of the form by the use of light and shade, which gives an appearance of three-dimensionality to most of the figures. The graded flesh tones are enhanced with shadows and highlights indicative of directional lighting.\n\nUnder Hellenic rule, Egypt hosted several Greek settlements, mostly concentrated in Alexandria , but also in a few other cities, where Greek settlers lived alongside some seven to ten million native Egyptians , or possibly a total of three to five million for all ethnicities, according to lower estimates. Faiyum's earliest Greek inhabitants were soldier-veterans and cleruchs (elite military officials) who were settled by the Ptolemaic kings on reclaimed lands. Native Egyptians also came to settle in Faiyum from all over the country, notably the Nile Delta , Upper Egypt , Oxyrhynchus and Memphis , to undertake the labor involved in the land reclamation process, as attested by personal names, local cults and recovered papyri . It is estimated that as much as 30 percent of the population of Faiyum was Greek during the Ptolemaic period, with the rest being native Egyptians. By the Roman period, much of the \"Greek\" population of Faiyum was made-up of either Hellenized Egyptians or people of mixed Egyptian-Greek origins. Later, in the Roman Period, many veterans of the Roman army, who, initially at least, were not Egyptian but people from disparate cultural and ethnic backgrounds, settled in the area after the completion of their service, and formed social relations and intermarried with local populations. \n\nWhile commonly believed to depict Greek settlers in Egypt, the Faiyum portraits instead reflect the complex synthesis of the predominant Egyptian culture and that of the elite Greek minority in the city. According to Walker, the early Ptolemaic Greek colonists married local women and adopted Egyptian religious beliefs, and by Roman times, their descendants were viewed as Egyptians by the Roman rulers, despite their own self-perception of being Greek. \n\nThe portraits are said to represent both descendants of ancient Greek mercenaries , who had fought for Alexander the Great , settled in Egypt and married local women, as well as native Egyptians who were the majority, many of whom had adopted Greek or Latin names, then seen as 'status symbols'. \n\nA DNA study showed genetic continuity between the Pre-Ptolemaic, Ptolemaic and Roman populations of Egypt, indicating that foreign rule impacted Egypt's population only to a very limited degree at the genetic level. \n\nIn terms of anthropological characteristics, academic Alan K. Bowman stated that based on skull analysis, the Faiyum mummy burials were said to be the same as 'native' Egyptians of the Pharaonic era. The dental morphology of the Roman-period Faiyum mummies was also compared with that of earlier Egyptian populations, and was found to be \"much more closely akin\" to that of ancient Egyptians, than to Greeks or other European populations. This conclusion was seen again in 2009, by Joel D. Irish, where he noted: \"Interestingly, Roman period Hawara in Lower Egypt seems not to have been composed of migrants-while there is a possibility that the dynastic occupation of Saqqara may have been.\" \n\nMost of the portraits depict the deceased at a relatively young age, and many show children. According to Susan Walker, C.A.T. scans reveal a correspondence of age and sex between mummy and image. She concludes that the age distribution reflects the low life expectancy at the time. It was often believed that the wax portraits were completed during the life of the individual and displayed in their home, a custom that belonged to the traditions of Greek art , but this view is no longer widely held given the evidence suggested by the C.A.T. scans of the Fayum mummies, as well as Roman census returns. In addition, some portraits were painted directly onto the coffin; for example, on a shroud or another part.\n\nThe patrons of the portraits apparently belonged to the affluent upper class of military personnel, civil servants and religious dignitaries. Not everyone could afford a mummy portrait; many mummies were found without one. Flinders Petrie states that only one or two percent of the mummies he excavated were embellished with portraits. The rates for mummy portraits do not survive, but it can be assumed that the material caused higher costs than the labour, since in antiquity, painters were appreciated as craftsmen rather than as artists. The situation from the \" Tomb of Aline \" is interesting in this regard. It contained four mummies: those of Aline, of two children and of her husband. Unlike his wife and children, the latter was not equipped with a portrait but with a gilt three-dimensional mask. Perhaps plaster masks were preferred if they could be afforded.\n\nBased on literary, archaeological and genetic studies, it appears that those depicted were native Egyptians, who had adopted the dominant Greco-Roman culture. \n\nHairstyles and clothing are always influenced by Roman fashion. Women and children are often depicted wearing valuable ornaments and fine garments, men often wearing specific and elaborate outfits. Men with beards were seen as having masculinity, maturity, and high social status. They were seen to have wisdom. Greek inscriptions of names are relatively common, sometimes they include professions. It is not known whether such inscriptions always reflect reality, or whether they may state ideal conditions or aspirations rather than true conditions. One single inscription is known to definitely indicate the deceased's profession (a shipowner) correctly. The mummy of a woman named Hermione also included the term γραμματική ( grammatike ). For a long time, it was assumed that this indicated that she was a teacher by profession; for this reason, Flinders Petrie donated the portrait to Girton College , Cambridge , the first residential college for women in Britain. However, today, it is assumed that the term indicates her level of education. Some portraits of men show sword-belts or even pommels, suggesting that they were members of the Roman military. \n\nThe burial habits of Ptolemaic Egyptians mostly followed ancient traditions. The bodies of members of the upper classes were mummified , equipped with a decorated coffin and a mummy mask to cover the head. The Greeks who entered Egypt at that time mostly followed their own habits. There is evidence from Alexandria and other sites indicating that they practised the Greek tradition of cremation . This broadly reflects the general situation in Hellenistic Egypt, its rulers proclaiming themselves to be pharaohs but otherwise living in an entirely Hellenistic world, incorporating only very few local elements. Conversely, the Egyptians only slowly developed an interest in the Greek-Hellenic culture that dominated the East Mediterranean since the conquests of Alexander . This situation changed substantially with the arrival of the Romans. Within a few generations, all Egyptian elements disappeared from everyday life. Cities like Karanis or Oxyrhynchus are largely Greco-Roman places. There is clear evidence that this resulted from a mixing of different ethnicities in the ruling classes of Roman Egypt. \n\nOnly in the sphere of religion is there evidence for a continuation of Egyptian traditions. Egyptian temples were erected as late as the 2nd century. In terms of burial habits, Egyptian and Hellenistic elements now mixed. Coffins became increasingly unpopular and went entirely out of use by the 2nd century. In contrast, mummification appears to have been practised by large parts of the population. The mummy mask, originally an Egyptian concept, grew more and more Graeco-Roman in style, Egyptian motifs became ever rarer. The adoption of Roman portrait painting into Egyptian burial cult belongs in this general context. \n\nSome authors suggest that the idea of such portraits may be related to the custom among the Roman nobility of displaying imagines , images of their ancestors, in the atrium of their house . In funeral processions, these wax masks were worn by professional mourners to emphasize the continuity of an illustrious family line, but originally perhaps to represent a deeper evocation of the presence of the dead. Roman festivals such as the Parentalia as well as everyday domestic rituals cultivated ancestral spirits (see also veneration of the dead ). The development of mummy portraiture may represent a combination of Egyptian and Roman funerary practices , since it appears only after Egypt was established as a Roman province . \n\nThe images depict the heads or busts of men, women and children. They probably date from c. 30 BC to the 3rd century. To the modern eye, the portraits appear highly individualistic. Therefore, it has been assumed for a long time that they were produced during the lifetime of their subjects and displayed as \"salon paintings\" within their houses, to be added to their mummy wrapping after their death. Newer research rather suggests that they were only painted after death, an idea perhaps contradicted by the multiple paintings on some specimens and the (suggested) change of specific details on others. The individualism of those depicted was actually created by variations in some specific details, within a largely unvaried general scheme. The habit of depicting the deceased was not a new one, but the painted images gradually replaced the earlier Egyptian masks, although the latter continued in use for some time, often occurring directly adjacent to portrait mummies, sometimes even in the same graves.\n\nThe combination of naturalistic Greek portrait of the deceased with Egyptian-form deities, symbols, and frame was primarily phenomenon of funerary art from the chora, or countryside, in Roman Egypt. Combining Egyptian and Greek pictorial forms or motifs was not restricted to funerary art, however: the public and highly visible portraits of Ptolemaic dynasts and Roman emperors grafted iconography developed for a ruler's Greek or Roman images onto Egyptian statues in the dress and posture of Egyptian kings and queens. The possible combinations of Greek and Egyptian elements can be elucidated by imposing a (somewhat artificial) distinction between form and content, where 'form' is taken as the system of representation, and 'content' as the symbol, concept, or figure being portrayed. \n\nThe religious meaning of mummy portraits has not, so far, been fully explained, nor have associated grave rites. There is some indication that it developed from genuine Egyptian funerary rites, adapted by a multi-cultural ruling class. The tradition of mummy portraits occurred from the Delta to Nubia , but it is striking that other funerary habits prevailed over portrait mummies at all sites except those in the Faiyum (and there especially Hawara and Achmim) and Antinoopolis. In most sites, different forms of burial coexisted. The choice of grave type may have been determined to a large extent by the financial means and status of the deceased, modified by local customs. Portrait mummies have been found both in rock-cut tombs and in freestanding built grave complexes, but also in shallow pits. It is striking that they are virtually never accompanied by any grave offerings, with the exception of occasional pots or sprays of flowers. \n\nFor a long time, it was assumed that the latest portraits belong to the end of the 4th century, but recent research has modified this view considerably, suggesting that the last wooden portraits belong to the middle, the last directly painted mummy wrappings to the second half of the 3rd century. It is commonly accepted that production reduced considerably since the beginning of the 3rd century. Several reasons for the decline of the mummy portrait have been suggested; no single reason should probably be isolated, rather, they should be seen as operating together.\n\nThus, a combination of several factors appears to have led to changes of fashion and ritual. No clear causality can be asserted. \n\nConsidering the limited nature of the current understanding of portrait mummies, it remains distinctly possible that future research will considerably modify the image presented here. For example, some scholars suspect that the centre of production of such finds, and thus the centre of the distinctive funerary tradition they represent, may have been located at Alexandria. New finds from Marina el-Alamein strongly support such a view. In view of the near-total loss of Greek and Roman paintings, mummy portraits are today considered to be among the very rare examples of ancient art that can be seen to reflect \"Great paintings\" and especially Roman portrait painting. \n\nMummy portraits depict a variety of different Roman hairstyles . They are one of the main aids in dating the paintings. The majority of the deceased were depicted with hairstyles then in fashion. They are frequently similar to those depicted in sculpture . [ citation needed ] As part of Roman propaganda, such sculptures, especially those depicting the imperial family, were often displayed throughout the empire. Thus, they had a direct influence on the development of fashion. Nevertheless, the mummy portraits, as well as other finds, suggest that fashions lasted longer in the provinces than in the imperial court, or at least that diverse styles might coexist. [ citation needed ]\n\nComparing the hairstyles on mummy portraits, it is revealed that the vast majority of them correspond to the fast-changing fashion of hairstyles used by the elite of the rest of the Roman Empire. They, in turn, often followed the fashion of the Roman emperors and their wives, whose images and coiffures can be dated through their depictions on coins. [ citation needed ] The female hairstyles are what is usually used for the dating of mummy portraits, because other than a number of elite boys who had long hair parted on the forehead and bound into a bun in the neck, male hairstyle does not differ by much. This is because Roman male was advised to avoid excessive attention to hairstyles as he may be criticized for unmanliness. Complex ringlets with nested plaits, and curls over the forehead was popular in the late first century, with small oval nested plaits popular in the time of Antonines. A later popular woman's hairstyle is one inspired by the Roman Empress, Faustina I, with longer strands at the middle of the scalp drawn back into twists or plaits that were then wound into a tutulus at the crown of the head. Central-parted hair-knots at the back of the neck were common later in the same period. Empress Julia Domna popularized fluffy waved hair. Straight hair was common in the same period while later plaits on the crown of the head were rarely present. [ citation needed ]\n\nOther than representations of their wealth and social status, the subject's clothing suggests their previous roles in their local communities. For instance, men depicted to show their bare upper torso were usually athletes. The most common attire is a cloak worn over a chiton. [ citation needed ] It is common to have a traditionally Roman decorative line, clavus (plural clavi ), on the subject's clothing. Most of the decorative lines are dark colored. While painted mummy portraits are shown to bear the traditional Roman decorative lines, not a single portrait has been definitely shown to depict the toga. It should, however, be kept in mind that Greek cloaks and togas are draped very similarly on depictions of the 1st and early 2nd centuries. In the late 2nd and 3rd centuries, togas should be distinguishable, but fail to occur. [ citation needed ]\n\nApart from the gold wreaths worn by many men, with very few exceptions, only women are depicted with jewellery. This generally accords with the common jewellery types of the Graeco-Roman East. Especially the Antinoopolis portraits depict simple gold link chains and massive gold rings. There are also depictions of precious or semi-precious stones like emerald , carnelian , garnet , agate or amethyst , rarely also of pearls . The stones were normally ground into cylindrical or spherical beads. Some portraits depict elaborate colliers , with precious stones set in gold. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe gold wreath was apparently rarely, if ever, worn in life, but a number have been found in graves from much earlier periods. Based on the plant wreaths given as prizes in contests, the idea was apparently to celebrate the achievements of the deceased in life.\n\nThere are three basic shapes of ear ornaments: Especially common in the 1st century are circular or drop-shaped pendants. Archaeological finds indicate that these were fully or semi-spherical. Later tastes favoured S-shaped hooks of gold wire, on which up to five beads of different colours and materials could be strung. The third shape are elaborate pendants with a horizontal bar from which two or three, occasionally four, vertical rods are suspended, usually each decorated with a white bead or pearl at the bottom. Other common ornaments include gold hairpins, often decorated with pearls, fine diadems , and, especially at Antinoopolis, gold hairnets . Many portraits also depict amulets and pendants , perhaps with magical functions. \n\nThe mummy portraits have immense art-historical importance. Ancient sources indicate that panel painting rather than wall painting (i.e., painting on wood or other mobile surfaces) was held in high regard, but very few ancient panel paintings survive. One of the few examples besides the mummy portraits is the Severan Tondo , also from Egypt (around 200), which, like the mummy portraits, is believed to represent a provincial version of contemporary style. \n\nSome aspects of the mummy portraits, especially their frontal perspective and their concentration on key facial features, strongly resemble later icon painting . A direct link has been suggested, but it should be kept in mind that the mummy portraits represent only a small part of a much wider Graeco-Roman tradition, the whole of which later bore an influence on the art of late antiquity and Byzantine art . A pair of panel \"icons\" of Serapis and Isis of comparable date (3rd century) and style are in the Getty Museum at Malibu ; as with the cult of Mithras , earlier examples of cult images were sculptures or pottery figurines, but from the 3rd century reliefs and then painted images are found. \n\nThe Fayum mummy images were used to recreate Jewish faces from first-century Judaea for the 2021 Israeli film Legend of Destruction . \n\nA further specimen discovered since: B. T. Trope; S. Quirke; P. Lacovara (2005). Excavating Egypt: great discoveries from the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology, University College, London . Atlanta, Georgia: Michael C. Carlos Museum. p. 101. ISBN 1-928917-06-2 .\n\n(chronological order)",
  "A muhaddith ( Arabic : محدث ) is a scholar specialized in the study, collection, and interpretation of hadiths , which are the recorded sayings, actions, and approvals of the Prophet Muhammad . The role of a muhaddith is central to the science of hadith (ʻilm al-ḥadīth), a key field for understanding and preserving Islamic teachings and laws . Muhaddith can either disseminate the hadiths or compile them into an ahadith . [ citation needed ]\n\nA muhaddith is a narrator of hadith, expert in the chains of narration ( isnad ) and the content of hadith ( matn ). They are responsible for verifying the authenticity of these narrations through rigorous methods, including the evaluation of the reliability of transmitters and the continuity of the chains of transmission. \n\nThe tradition of collecting hadiths began soon after the death of Prophet Muhammad. Early efforts to compile these sayings into organized collections were undertaken by notable figures like Umar ibn al-Khattab and Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz . These efforts laid the groundwork for subsequent scholars, leading to the creation of the major hadith collections. \n\nSome of the most renowned hadith collections include:\n\nThese collections are highly regarded in Islamic scholarship and are used extensively in the derivation of Islamic law (Sharia) and theology. \n\nProminent scholars have outlined the qualifications and duties of a muhaddith. For example, Taj al-Din al-Subki emphasized the extensive knowledge required in the chains of narration, the defects of hadith, and the biographies of narrators. Al Zarkashi highlighted the need for comprehensive knowledge in the science of hadith and memorization of a significant number of hadiths and their chains. \n\nThe role of muhaddithin is considered a blessing for the Muslim ummah (community), as they ensure the authenticity and preservation of the Prophet's teachings . This meticulous work allows Muslims to distinguish between genuine hadiths and those that are fabricated, maintaining the integrity of Islamic teachings. ",
  "Reformed orthodoxy or Calvinist orthodoxy was an era in the history of Calvinism in the 16th to 18th centuries. Calvinist orthodoxy was paralleled by similar eras in Lutheranism and tridentine Roman Catholicism after the Counter-Reformation . Calvinist scholasticism or Reformed scholasticism was a theological method that gradually developed during the era of Calvinist Orthodoxy.\n\nTheologians used the neo-Aristotelian form of presentation, already popular in academia, in their writings and lectures. They defined the Reformed faith and defended it against the polemics of opposing parties. While the Reformed often used \"scholastic\" as a term of derision for their Roman Catholic opponents and the content of their theology, most Reformed theologians during this period can properly be called scholastics with respect to the method of theology, though they also used other methods. J. V. Fesko describes scholasticism in this sense as \"a method of doing theology that sets out to achieve theological precision through the exegesis of Scripture, an examination of how doctrine has been historically defined throughout church history, and how doctrine is expounded in contemporary debate.\" \n\nProtestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Aristotelianism Scholasticism Patristics\n\nSecond scholasticism of the School of Salamanca Lutheran scholasticism during Lutheran orthodoxy Ramism among the Reformed orthodoxy Metaphysical poets in the Church of England\n\nThe Jesuits against Jansenism Labadists against the Jesuits Pietism against orthodox Lutherans Nadere Reformatie within Dutch Calvinism Richard Hooker against the Ramists\n\nNeologists against Lutherans Spinozists against Dutch Calvinists Deists against Anglicanism John Locke against Bishop Stillingfleet\n\nIn the past, scholars described the theology of Protestant scholastics following John Calvin as more rationalistic and philosophical than the more exegetical biblical theology of John Calvin and other early Reformers . This is commonly described as the \"Calvin against the Calvinists\" paradigm. Beginning in the 1980s, Richard Muller and other scholars in the field provided extensive evidence showing both that the early Reformers were deeply influenced by scholasticism and that later Reformed scholasticism was deeply exegetical, using the scholastic method to organize and explicate exegetical theology. \n\nMedieval schools of theology used methods of instruction known as lectio-meditatio-quaestio and disputationes . In the first method, teachers would first read an authoritative text with some commentary ( lectio ), allow students to consider the text silently ( meditatio ), and finally the students would ask questions of the teacher to get at the meaning ( quaestio ). \n\nScholasticism was used by Protestant theologians primarily from 1560 to 1790, which is known as the period of orthodoxy because of the importance of adherence to and defense of the newly written Reformed confessions of faith for these theologians. \n\nJohn Calvin , unlike other early reformers like Martin Luther , was not formally trained in theology; while Calvin was trained in law, Luther was trained in both law and theology. Like many early reformers, however, he was influenced by Renaissance humanism , which led to an interest in the original meaning of biblical and patristic texts and criticism of medieval scholastics for straying from this meaning in favor of philosophical distinctions. Analysis of his work, however, shows that he found himself using some of the same distinctions employed by the scholastics, and some of the criticisms he made of scholastic theology may have actually been based on his own misunderstanding. It is clear, however, that Calvin's use of scholastic theology is different in that, while medieval scholastic theology was solely employed by professional theologians in the schools, rather than by ordinary clergy in preaching , Calvin saw theological teaching as one of the primary objectives of the church and intended his theological works to be used by both preachers and common people. Many of his criticisms of purely speculative scholastic theology may be seen as a consequence of his desire to make theology accessible and useful for the church rather than solely for professional theologians in the schools. \n\nThough scholasticism can already be seen in early Reformed theologians, especially Vermigli and to some degree Calvin , it became much more prevalent during the third and fourth generations of Reformed theologians as a tool to institutionalize the faith by codifying it in confessions and works of systematic theology , as well as to combat the growing sophistication of counter-Reformation polemicists. Reformed confessions of faith such as the Heidelberg Catechism of 1563 (commissioned by Elector Frederick III of the Palatinate ), the Belgic Confession of 1561, and the French Gallican Confession of 1559 served as boundary markers for the new faith and as starting places for theological development. The formation of the Genevan Academy in 1559 also enabled Reformed theologians to receive extensive academic training and participate in the wider academic theological discourse. It also served as a model for other Reformed institutions of higher learning throughout Europe. Counter-Reformation attacks from Roman Catholic writers such as Jesuit Cardinal Robert Bellarmine were written in the tradition of scholasticism and needed to be answered in kind. Reformed theologians such as Heidelberg professors Zacharias Ursinus and Girolamo Zanchi adopted the tools of scholastic theology such as the quaestio method to rigorously exposit the Reformed confessions. \n\nThe early 17th-century Arminian controversy , in which a group known as the Remonstrants argued that predestination to salvation is based on God foreseeing a person's faith, brought about the Synod of Dort , which defined the Reformed doctrine on this matter in greater detail. The 1594 treatise by Huguenot theologian Franciscus Junius On True Theology was the first Protestant work to distinguish archetypal theology (God's knowledge of himself) and ectypal theology (our knowledge of God based on his condescending revelation to us). This distinction, which has its roots in the medieval Scotist distinction between theology in itself ( theologia in se ) and our theology ( theologia nostra ), limits the degree to which God can be known by sinful man and became important in later Reformed and Lutheran theology. \n\nThrough the influence of refugees from continental Europe such as Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr Vermigli, late 16th century English theology was predominately Reformed in nature, though Arminianism gained dominance after 1700. Puritans William Perkins and William Ames were important figures in Reformed English theology during this period. Reformed theologians at the University of St. Andrews assured Calvinism's hold on Scotland. \n\nFollowing the Synod of Dort, which ended in 1619, the Reformed began to give greater definition and detail to their theological system by writing comprehensive systematic theologies. The period was also characterized by intense polemical writing against several groups. The Remonstrants, having been repudiated in the synod of Dort, became an independent movement with their own seminary and dogmatic textbooks, and the Reformed wrote against them with even greater intensity. Reformed polemics were also directed against the increasingly influential Socinians , who denied the Trinity and other traditional Christian doctrines. Early Socinians had already had some influence on the development of Remonstrantism during the early orthodox period. In addition, the rise of Cartesianism provided another target for Reformed scholastics such as Dutch theologian Gisbertus Voetius , who argued that Descartes 's philosophical skepticism placed reason above revelation instead of subjecting reason to biblical revelation. \n\nIn the Netherlands, three strands within Reformed orthodoxy may be distinguished, though all of these stayed within the boundaries provided by the Canons of Dort. The theologia traditiva was most notably represented by Samuel Maresius and Friedrich Spanheim the Elder and Younger . This strain was in many ways aligned with a second strain, the school of Voetius. Unlike the Voetians, however, the followers of the theologia traditiva were infralapsarian , arguing that God's decree to create men and allow the Fall logically precedes the decree to elect some men to salvation. They also, contrary to the Voetians, approved of some degree of governmental involvement in church affairs, were more lax with respect to Sabbath observance , and were in general more moderate polemicists. Differences between these groups decreased throughout the 17th century, as they positioned themselves against a third strain, the Cocceians. The school of Johannes Cocceius differed from the Voetians and the rest of Reformed scholastic theology in teaching on the relationship of the Old and New Testament. The Cocceians taught that the Sabbath commandment was abrogated in the New Covenant and had other disagreements regarding the relationship between the covenant of works and the covenant of grace . Though Cocceius himself rejected Cartesianism, some of his followers were influenced by it and this led to even more suspicion of the Coccieans on behalf of the rest of the Reformed. \n\nIn France, Moses Amyraut at the Academy of Saumur taught a doctrine known as Amyraldism which is considered a compromise between the doctrine of predestination presented at the Synod of Dort and that of Arminianism. Amyraut taught that God elects to salvation in two ways. First, the entire human race is elected to salvation on condition of their faith in him. Then, based on his foreknowledge that no one would have faith, God elects some to salvation in a second, particular election. Most Reformed scholastics rejected Amyraut's views, arguing that it was a return to Arminianism because the first decree of election was conditional on faith. The Swiss Formula consensus Helvetica was written primarily by Johann Heinrich Heidegger with help from Francis Turretin to repudiate Amyraldism. \n\nIn England, many of the Reformed, along with some other Protestants refused to remain within the Anglican church and were thus known as Nonconformists . They were divided between Presbyterians (who maintained a hierarchical church government), Independents or Congregationalists (who advocated the autonomy of local churches), and Baptists (who through the influence of Dutch Anabaptists practiced only believer's baptism ). The 1647 Westminster Confession of Faith established a consensus among them. \n\nDuring the eighteenth century the scholastic method of theology began to stagnate in favor of exegetical and historical theology . The Age of Enlightenment brought about greater reliance on reason and less dependence on the authority of authoritative texts such as the Bible, leading to the rise of biblical criticism and natural theology . \n\nIn the Netherlands the \"Green Cocceians\" (named after Henricus Groenewegen, Groen = Green in Dutch) surpassed the Voetians who had been dominant in the 17th century. They attempted to find a mediating position between Enlightenment thought and Reformed theology, which resulted in intense controversy with other Reformed scholastics. Enlightenment thought was even more influential in Germany and England, leading to the rise of deism, biblical criticism, and rationalism at the expense of scholastic modes of thinking. John Gill defended the English particular Baptists , who taught the Reformed doctrine of limited atonement , from the influence of Arminianism and Socianism and is considered one of the most important Reformed scholastics of the 18th century. \n\nReformed scholastic theology was more dominant in Scotland. The Marrow Controversy , which began in 1718, was caused by disagreements between so-called the neonomians and antinomians over the relationship of the covenant of works and covenant of grace. The opposing sides often used scholastic distinctions and methods. The controversy ended with the split of the Church of Scotland and the establishment of the Associate Presbytery . \n\nIn Switzerland the Enlightenment had a significant impact on the shape of Reformed theology. Jean Alphonse Turretin , son of high orthodox scholastic Francis Turretin, along with Jean-Frédéric Osterwald and Samuel Werenfels rejected the doctrine of predestination, the Synod of Dort, and the Helvetic Consensus. ",
  "A sideman is a professional musician who is hired to perform live with a solo artist, or with a group in which they are not a regular band member. The term is usually used to describe musicians that play with jazz or rock artists, whether solo or a group. \n\nSidemen and sidewomen are often well-versed in multiple styles of music, and can be hired at any level of the music industry, from playing in a cover band to backing up established artists on major tours. \n\nWhile many artists can work as sidemen or session musicians , others will only fill one role. The generally accepted difference is that a sideman performs live while a session musician is hired to perform in a recording studio. \n\nAspiring musicians often start out as sidemen, playing rhythm guitar, comping on keyboards, playing drums in the rhythm section , or singing backing vocals for a well-known bandleader or singer. Once sidemen have become experienced with live performance and recording with established artists, some move on to develop their own sound, a recognized name, and fans of their own, or go on to form their own groups, at which point they become bandleaders and recruit their own sidemen and sidewomen. Some examples of this are:\n\nSome sidemen become famous for their musical specialties, and become highly sought-after by pop , rock, blues , jazz and country music bands. Examples of some of these include multi-instrumentalists. David Lindley is a multi-instrumentalist who has worked with such diverse musicians as Curtis Mayfield , Dolly Parton , Jackson Browne , and Hani Naser . \n\nWaddy Wachtel 's guitar licks and experience have placed him as a bandleader while on tour with Stevie Nicks , and Chuck Leavell , who has toured with The Allman Brothers Band , but more often, is onstage with The Rolling Stones on keyboards. \n\nOften sidemen go on to form their own groups and/or solo careers; for instance, John Lennon , Paul McCartney , George Harrison , and Pete Best acted as sidemen to Tony Sheridan before becoming famous as The Beatles , with the addition of Ringo Starr . Jimmy Page left his first attempts working in bands to hone his skills as a session player, where he met John Paul Jones ; he later recruited Robert Plant and John Bonham to form Led Zeppelin . Bob Dylan 's first recorded song was as a harmonica sideman on Harry Belafonte 's cover of \" Midnight Special \". \n\nOther musicians may take time from their own bands to tour or record as a sideman for other artists, such as punk bassist Mike Watt with J Mascis and the Fog or Iggy and the Stooges . ",
  "A numismatist is a specialist, researcher, and/or well-informed collector of numismatics/coins (\"of coins\"; from Late Latin numismatis , genitive of numisma ). Numismatists can include collectors, specialist dealers, and scholar-researchers who use coins (and possibly, other currency) in object-based research. Although use of the term numismatics was first recorded in English in 1799, people had been collecting and studying coins long before then all over the world. (The branch of numismatics that deals with the study and collection of paper currency and banknotes by notaphilists is called Notaphily )\n\nThis group chiefly may derive pleasure from the simple ownership of monetary devices and studying these coins as private amateur scholars. In the classical field, amateur collector studies have achieved quite remarkable progress in the field. Examples include Walter Breen , a noted numismatist who was not an avid collector, and King Farouk I of Egypt , an avid collector who had very little interest in numismatics. Harry Bass by comparison was a noted collector who was also a numismatist.\n\nIn this group are the coin dealers. Often called professional numismatists, they authenticate or grade coins for commercial purposes. The buying and selling of coin collections by numismatists who are professional dealers advance the study of money, and expert numismatists are consulted by historians, museum curators, and archaeologists. See, for example, the International Association of Professional Numismatists (IAPN) and the British Numismatic Trade Association (BNTA) .\n\nIn this group are scholar numismatists working in public collections, universities or as independent scholars acquiring knowledge about monetary devices, their systems, their economy and their historical context. Coins are especially relevant as a source in the pre-modern period.\n\nThere are very few academic institutions around the world that offer formal training in numismatics. Some may offer numismatics as part of a course in classical studies, ancient history, history or archaeology. Scholar numismatists may focus on numismatics at the postgraduate level, where the training is more research-based. As a result, most scholar numismatists will approach numismatics from within another academic discipline (e.g. history, archaeology, ancient or modern languages, metal sciences), perhaps after attending a numismatic summer school, usually based where there is an excellent coin collection. Recognition of scholarly numismatic expertise may be in the form of a postgraduate qualification, and/or in the form of a medal awarded by a numismatic society: for example, the Medal of the Royal Numismatic Society , which may be awarded to scholar numismatists of any nationality.\n\nDonald H. Kagin earned the first PhD in Numismatics granted in the United States in 1979. \n\nNumismatic institutes\n\nNumismatic summer schools\n\nAs scholar numismatists work on coins (and related objects) within their particular area of interest (e.g. a particular part of the world, a particular period of history, or a particular culture), they are often known in those fields, as well as in numismatics. Biographical resources relating specifically to numismatists include the following:",
  "Cartoon Saloon is an Irish animation film, short film and television studio based in Kilkenny which provides film TV and short film services. The studio is best known for its animated feature films The Secret of Kells , Song of the Sea , The Breadwinner and Wolfwalkers . Their works have received five Academy Award nominations, their first four feature length works all received nominations for Best Animated Feature and one for Best Animated Short Film ( Late Afternoon ). The company also developed the cartoon series Skunk Fu! , Puffin Rock , Dorg Van Dango and Vikingskool . As of 2020, the studio employs 300 animators.\n\nCartoon Saloon was established in Kilkenny during 1999 by Tomm Moore , Nora Twomey , and Paul Young . The three were all alumni of the Ballyfermot College of Further Education ’s animation degree course. Cartoon Saloon began working on a trailer for its first feature film, The Secret of Kells , that same year. However, the film did not enter full production until 2005; the company animated corporate work such as advertisements as they searched for funding. Meanwhile the studio of 12 animators relied on commercial and corporate work including web-site design and CD ROM production with Paul Young focusing on illustration whilst Tomm Moore undertook the animation . \n\nBoth The Secret of Kells and the studio’s second feature Song of the Sea were inspired by The Thief and the Cobbler and Mulan while the founders were in university. Tomm Moore, the director of both films, said \"Some friends in college and I were inspired by Richard Williams' unfinished masterpiece The Thief and the Cobbler and the Disney movie Mulan , which took indigenous traditional art as the starting point for a beautiful style of 2D animation. I felt that something similar could be done with Irish art.\" A 2001 meeting with Les Armateurs proved instrumental in the effort to secure funding for The Secret of Kells , and the company helped in the production of the final film. \n\nThe success and Oscar nomination of the film in 2009 led to major offers for Cartoon Saloon, but the studio chose to remain independent. This led to a difficult time financially for the company for a few years with the partners having to take out personal loans to keep the studio afloat. \n\nAs of 2021, Cartoon Saloon is in production of its TV series, Vikingskool and Nora Twomey's second feature for Netflix, My Father's Dragon . \n\nThe studio provides animation, illustration and design services for clients ranging from Disney to BBC to Cartoon Network . \n\nCartoon Saloon also provided the graphics for the successful Emperor of the Irish exhibition at Trinity College Dublin , in 2014. \n\nLighthouse Studios was founded in 2017 by this studio and Mercury Filmworks .\n\n52°39′11″N 7°15′21″W ﻿ / ﻿ 52.653034°N 7.25584°W ﻿ / 52.653034; -7.25584",
  "A technoparade (taken from the German word \"Technoparade\") is a parade of vehicles equipped with strong loudspeakers and amplifiers playing electronic dance music . It resembles a carnival parade in some respects, but the vehicles (called lovemobiles ) are usually less elaborately decorated. [ citation needed ] Unlike some carnival parades, a technoparade does not share the tradition of bombarding the spectators with sweets. [ citation needed ] However, the revellers do occasionally throw confetti (usually larger and more sparkly than that in a carnival parade) and spray foam from the vehicles onto the crowd. [ citation needed ]\n\nNearly all of the vehicles are converted trucks . [ citation needed ] In order to power the amplifiers, the trucks are frequently equipped with an additional electrical generator . [ citation needed ] For safety reasons, horse-drawn floats are never used in technoparades: there would be a danger of horses panicking from the noise and chaos. [ citation needed ] However, there are occasional human-drawn floats equipped with generators, record players, amplifiers and loudspeakers. [ citation needed ] Some of the vehicles allow people to ride along, for a fee. [ citation needed ] For those on the sidelines, or travelling alongside on foot or bicycles, attendance is free. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe official program of a technoparade is generally not as important as what happens informally. [ citation needed ] In contrast to a carnival parade, the vehicles are little more than flatbed trucks with sound equipment, rather than elaborately decorated floats. [ citation needed ] There are usually no fireworks or other traditional elements of large celebrations. [ citation needed ] Technoparades are rarely linked to anniversaries of historical events: [ citation needed ] they usually simply take place in the summer to take advantage of the good weather. [ citation needed ]\n\nHowever, in Germany technoparades are usually officially registered as a political demonstration and thus have an appropriate motto. That way techno fans have a constitutional right to dance in the streets, and any objections from the authorities to noise and traffic obstructions are overruled and the cities also have to pay for security and cleaning up the streets afterwards. \n\nTechnoparades generally have a carnival atmosphere, [ citation needed ] where social rules (and some laws, or at least their enforcement) are at least loosened, and sometimes broken outright. [ citation needed ] An atmosphere of chaos and tolerance prevails [ citation needed ] as bystanders dance to the shifting sounds of successive vehicles rolling by them: [ citation needed ] the music blasting from one vehicle blends into that from another, [ citation needed ] which can mean a sudden change of dance style in the area where the spheres of influence overlap. [ citation needed ] The music coming from two sound trucks overlaps with approximately equal intensity, [ citation needed ] and people can dance to either of two competing rhythms . [ citation needed ] In the technoparade subculture they call this the Verwirrungsgebiet (\" overlap zone \") by analogy to a concept in radio frequency engineering . [ citation needed ]\n\nThe street allows for a type of dancing that would be literally impossible in cramped German nightclubs [ citation needed ] , and the breadth of some people's dancing is further exaggerated as they throw their clothes outwards. [ citation needed ] Some in the crowd generally climb up to any high point that can possibly be scaled, more and more as the event continues. [ citation needed ] The spirit is usually continued at after-parties in the local nightclubs [ citation needed ] , sometimes including unofficial after-parties at venues having no official connection to the parade. [ citation needed ]\n\n5 big technoparades of the 1990s and early 2000s:\n\nParades with a political character:\n\nSmall town or onetime moves:\n\nSimilar to technoparades, electronic dance events have also been organized using other moving vehicles such as boats and trams . In contrast to technoparades which are characterized by free participation on the street, in this case only the passengers on the vessels or inside the trams are part of the event. An example for a boatparade is the Berlin Beats & Boats event which takes place annually since 2009 and involves up to 14 swimming dancefloors. A regular Housetram event has been organized by Monika Kruse in Munich since 1995. \n\nMedia related to Technoparades at Wikimedia Commons",
  "Ballwil railway station ( German : Bahnhof Ballwil ) is a railway station in the municipality of Ballwil , in the Swiss canton of Lucerne . It is an intermediate stop on the standard gauge Seetal line of Swiss Federal Railways .\n\nThe following services stop at Ballwil: ",
  "Jacques Loeb ( / l oʊ b / ; German: [løːp] ; April 7, 1859 – February 11, 1924) was a German-born American physiologist and biologist .\n\nJacques (born Itzak) Loeb, firstborn son of a Jewish family from the German Eifel region, was educated at the universities of Berlin, Munich , and Strasburg (M.D. 1884). He took postgraduate courses at the universities of Strasburg and Berlin, and in 1886 became assistant at the physiological institute of the University of Würzburg , remaining there until 1888. In a similar capacity, he then went to Strasburg University. During his vacations he pursued biological research, at Kiel in 1888, and at Naples in 1889 and 1890.\n\nLoeb first arrived in the United States in 1891 when he accepted a position at Bryn Mawr College , however, they provided insufficient facilities for his work which would later influence his resignation. In 1892, he was called to the University of Chicago as assistant professor of physiology and experimental biology, while later becoming associate professor in 1895, and professor of physiology in 1899. John B. Watson (the \"father of Behaviorism\") attended Loeb's neurology classes at the University of Chicago. He was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society in 1899. In 1902, he was called to fill a similar chair at the University of California . Writer John Fleming Wilson (1877-1922) called Carmel Point \"Point Loeb\" after Professor Loeb, one of the many professors who had summer homes on Professors' Row on the edge of Carmel-by-the-Sea, California . \n\nIn 1910, Loeb moved to the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research in New York, where he headed a department created for him. He remained at Rockefeller (now Rockefeller University ) until his death. Throughout his career, Loeb spent some summers at the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts , performing experiments on various marine invertebrates. While there, Jacques Loeb performed his most famous experiment, on artificial parthenogenesis . With this experiment, Loeb was able to cause the sea urchins ' eggs to begin embryonic development without sperm. The slight chemical modifications of the water in which the eggs were kept, served as the stimulus for the development to begin. Later in 1918, Loeb established and became the first Editor of the Journal of General Physiology .\n\nJacques Loeb became one of the most famous scientists in America, widely covered in newspapers and magazines, influencing other important individuals in the scientific world such as B.F. Skinner . He was the model for the character of Max Gottlieb in Sinclair Lewis 's Pulitzer -winning novel Arrowsmith , the first great work of fiction to idealize and idolize pure science. Mark Twain also wrote an essay titled \"Dr. Loeb's Incredible Discovery\", urging the reader not to support a rigid general consensus, but to instead be open to new scientific advances. \n\nLoeb was nominated many times for the Nobel Prize but never won.\n\nDr. Loeb was an atheist. He died of coronary artery disease while vacationing in Bermuda in 1924. \n\nThe main subjects of Loeb's work were:\n\nAmong Loeb's works the following may be mentioned:\n\nThe Mechanistic Conception of Life is Loeb's most famous and influential work. It contains English translations of some of his previous publications in German.\n\nHis younger brother Leo also emigrated to the United States where he became a noted pathologist.",
  "An independent politician or non-affiliated politician is a politician not affiliated with any political party or bureaucratic association. There are numerous reasons why someone may stand for office as an independent.\n\nSome politicians have political views that do not align with the platforms of any political party and therefore they choose not to affiliate with them. Some independent politicians may be associated with a party, perhaps as former members of it or else have views that align with it, but choose not to stand in its name, or are unable to do so because the party in question has selected another candidate. Others may belong to or support a political party at the national level but believe they should not formally represent it (and thus be subject to its policies) at another level. In some cases, a politician may be a member of an unregistered party and therefore officially recognised as an independent.\n\nOfficeholders may become independents after losing or repudiating affiliation with a political party. Independents sometimes choose to form a party, alliance, or technical group with other independents, and may formally register that organization. Even where the word \"independent\" is used, such alliances can have much in common with a political party, especially if there is an organization which needs to approve the \"independent\" candidates.\n\nThe current president of Algeria, Abdelmadjid Tebboune , presented himself as an independent candidate during the 2019 presidential election campaign. However, he remained a member of the central committee of the National Liberation Front (Algeria) of which he has been a member since the 1970s. Prime Minister Nadir Larbaoui is also an independent.\n\nIn the 2020 Namibian local and regional elections , independent politicians won four seats.\n\nThe President of Tunisia Kais Saied was elected in 2019 and re-elected in 2024 by presenting himself as an independent. The heads of government Hichem Mechichi , Najla Bouden , Ahmed Hachani and Kamel Madouri also lack any official political affiliation.\n\nIndependent politicians are not allowed to run for office in Brazil. The Constitution of 1988, in Article 14, §3rd, item V, says that \"Are conditions for eligibility: V - party affiliation\". However, the Proposal Amendment to the Constitution (PEC) no. 6/2015, authored by independent senator José Reguffe , would allow the independent candidacy of individuals who have the support of at least 1% of the electors able to vote in the region (city, state or country, depending on the election) in which the candidate is running. Currently, members of the legislature can leave their respective parties after being elected, as in the case of senator Reguffe, who left the Democratic Labour Party (PDT) in 2016. Jair Bolsonaro was independent between 2019 and 2021.\n\nIn Canadian federal politics, members of both the House of Commons and the Senate are permitted to hold office without being members of a political party. Candidates in federal elections who are not affiliated with a party have two options: independent or no affiliation. In the former case, they appear on the ballot with \"Independent\" following their name; in the second case, they appear with their name only. The two options are otherwise equivalent.\n\nDuring the earliest Canadian Parliaments, a lack of coherent political identity among both the Liberal and Conservative parties is known to have led to Members of Parliament (MPs) occasionally demonstrating independence from their party by voting in line with the opposition. Commonly, the issues which caused these MPs to act independently were religious in nature. These tensions began to disperse over the course of the first ten Canadian parliaments as the major political parties began to form consistent identities and MPs began affiliating themselves with the parties they knew more closely shared their core values. This in turn increased cohesion between parties and MPs, and minimized the causes and motivations for MPs to act independently. \n\nMany observers of the Canadian House of Commons in the 21st century have noted its incredibly high party discipline. Few MPs choose to vote against their party's official stance on any given piece of legislation. Between 2011 and 2013—the first two years of the 41st Canadian Parliament , following the 2011 Canadian federal election —the elected members of the governing Conservative Party voted as a unified group on 76% of all votes, while members of the Liberal Party did so on 90% of all votes, and members of the New Democratic Party (NDP) did so on 100% of votes. This unity further increased in subsequent years, as in the 42nd Parliament , following the 2015 election , the governing Liberal MPs voted identically on 99.6% of all votes, Conservative MPs on 99.5% of votes, and NDP MPs on 99.8% of votes. (Conservatives, Liberals, and NDP were the only three parties with enough MPs to qualify for official party status in the 41st and 42nd parliaments.) Thanks to this strong party discipline, it is uncommon to see politicians who are otherwise affiliated with any of the main political parties act independently of their party.\n\nThough it is acceptable and accepted for politicians to serve as independent MPs, those who attempt to run as such often struggle to be elected without access to the resources of the major parties. As a result, there are seldom more than one or two independent MPs within modern Canadian Parliaments, with many who do sit as such being initially elected as a part of a major party before either leaving voluntarily or being removed. In the first year of the 44th Canadian Parliament , the House of Commons featured one sitting independent member: Kevin Vuong , from the Ontario electoral district , or riding, of Spadina—Fort York . Vuong had originally campaigned as a member of the Liberal Party during the 2021 federal election but was ejected from the party two days prior to the end of the vote due to controversy surrounding past allegations of sexual assault. Despite his removal from the Liberal Party, Vuong won the election for his riding and chose to take his seat as an independent, though this decision was met with controversy because many voters had not known that the Liberals had expelled him before casting their votes. In 2022, Alain Rayes , MP for the Quebec riding of Richmond—Arthabaska , resigned from the Conservative caucus to sit as an independent, becoming the second independent MP of the 44th Parliament.\n\nIndependent politicians have on occasion held considerable sway in the House of Commons of Canada in recent years, as Canada has been governed by successive minority governments (five of the seven that have been formed since the 2004 federal election ) with independent MPs sometimes sharing in the balance of power .\n\nWhile traditionally framed as an \"independent body of sober second thought\", appointments to the Senate of Canada prior to 2016 were commonly seen as highly partisan, with the majority of Canadian senators identifying themselves as members of either the Liberal or Conservative parties and serving within their party's caucus. As these have been the only two parties to ever form government in Canada, only the Liberal and Conservative parties had been able to appoint new senators. Because Canadian senators are appointed by the Governor General of Canada on the advice of the Prime Minister rather than being elected, senators were often accused of being appointed as a \"reward\" for service to the party in power, and once appointed, of simply repeating the points and positions of their counterparts in the House of Commons rather than acting as a means of truly independent policy review. \n\nIn 2014, as a response to growing public disapproval of the Senate and the perceived problems brought about by senator partisanship, Liberal Party leader Justin Trudeau made the decision to expel all Liberal senators from the Liberal Party caucus. Trudeau would go on to call for an overall elimination of partisanship in the Senate and pledged to end the practice of partisan appointments for senators and transition to a new system of merit-based appointments if elected Prime Minister. \n\nFollowing the election of a Liberal majority government in 2015, the Independent Advisory Board for Senate Appointments was established with the goal of filling Senate vacancies through a selection process based on political knowledge, merit, and perceived ability to act independently of partisan affiliation. This push to remove partisan ties from the Senate resulted in the creation of the Independent Senators Group , a coalition of both newly appointed independent senators and formally partisan senators who had relinquished their formal party ties, alongside the also independent Canadian Senators Group and Progressive Senate Group . \n\nBy 2018, the majority of Canadian Senators were officially independent, though some Liberal senators continued to remain affiliated with the political party despite no longer being permitted within the party caucus. Additionally, the Conservative Party elected not to remove its senators from the party caucus, and many Conservative Party senators kept their official partisan affiliations in public. During the 2019 federal election campaign, in response to reporters' questions, Conservative Party leader Andrew Scheer said that if his party were elected to form government and he became prime minister, he would reinstate the practice of partisan appointments to the Senate. \n\nThe efforts to increase senatorial independence have led some to argue the Senate has developed an increase of importance and power in the legislative process. As of 2021, it was found that Canadian senators were facing increasing pressure from lobbying groups on a variety of issues, suggesting the more independent Senate has a greater perceived influence over legislative issues. Additionally, following the appointment of senators through the Independent Advisory Board for Senate Appointments, there has been a noted increase in the number of amendments the Senate has proposed for legislation from the House of Commons. During the 42nd Parliament (2015–2019), the Senate attempted to amend 13 government bills, whereas during the 41st Parliament (2011–2015), it had attempted to amend only one government bill. The reformed Senate is noted as having proposed amendments on at least 20% of all legislation. \n\nSeveral observers and those involved with the Senate itself have criticized the Trudeau government for its attempted reforms, with most accusations centering around the belief that the new appointment process is biased towards those who are ideologically supportive of the Liberal Party's objectives. Remaining Conservative senators have accused the Independent Senators Group in particular as being \"too quick to endorse bills from the Liberal government\". \n\nSupporting this claim, a 2021 study found that members of the Independent Senators Group voted in favor of legislation proposed by the incumbent Liberal government more consistently than any other group within the Senate, including those still formally aligned to the Liberal Party. This was, however, among an overall trend in which all senators demonstrated lower levels of party loyalty, and as such its full implications are still unknown. The report also concluded that partisanship in Senate appointments was undeniably down when compared to the Senate prior to the reforms. It is generally thought that it will only be possible to judge the success of the attempted reforms accurately when a non-Liberal government is elected to the House of Commons, at which point it can be observed if the noted trend in voting represents simple loyalty to the government, or loyalty to the Liberal Party. \n\nThe territorial legislatures of the Northwest Territories and Nunavut are consensus governments with no political parties. All members sit as independents. There are a few independent members of the other provincial and territorial legislatures, which are similar in principle to the federal House of Commons; for example, in the 2009 British Columbia general election , independent candidate Vicki Huntington narrowly defeated incumbent Attorney General Wally Oppal in Delta South . In the 2019 Newfoundland and Labrador general election , two independent candidates were elected. \n\nCurrent laws in Costa Rica do not permit a citizen to run directly for any elected position as an independent without the representation of a political party. Any nomination must be made through a political party, due to the framework of the current legal system, in which the political parties have a monopoly on the nomination of candidates for elected positions according to the Electoral Code. \n\nHowever, becoming an independent politician after being elected is protected by virtue of Article 25 of the Constitution of Costa Rica , which guarantees freedom of association ; therefore, any citizen cannot be forced to remain in a specific political party and can join any other political group. It is common in each legislative period for some deputies ( diputados , term used for legislators) of the Legislative Assembly of Costa Rica to become independents; this has also happened with the mayors ( alcaldes ) of the municipalities of cantons . \n\nJaime Heliodoro Rodríguez Calderón (born in 1957), sometimes referred to by his nickname \"Bronco\", is a Mexican politician and former governor for the northern state of Nuevo León and holds no political party affiliation. As of June 7, 2015 [update] , he was elected Governor of Nuevo León, making history as the first independent candidate to win in the country.\n\nGeorge Washington is the only U.S. president elected as an independent to date. Washington opposed the development of political parties , which had begun to solidify as the Federalist faction, centered around John Adams and Alexander Hamilton , and the Democratic-Republican faction, centered around Thomas Jefferson and James Madison . Washington feared that partisanship would eventually destroy the country, and famously warned against \"the baneful effects of the spirit of party\" in his 1796 Farewell Address . \n\nJohn Tyler was expelled from the Whig Party in September 1841, and effectively remained an independent for the remainder of his presidency. He later returned to the Democratic Party and briefly sought election in 1844 as a Tyler Democrat , but withdrew over fear he would split the Democratic vote and give the election to Whig candidate Henry Clay .\n\nSince 1900, notable candidates running as independents for U.S. president have included congressman John Anderson in 1980 , billionaire entrepreneur Ross Perot in 1992 and 1996 (in 1996 under the newly founded Reform Party ), former Green Party candidate Ralph Nader in the 1996 and 2000 elections, and \"Never Trump\" conservative candidate Evan McMullin in 2016 . Out of all independent candidates since Washington, Perot performed the best, gaining no votes in the Electoral College but receiving 19 percent of the popular vote and, early in the election season, leading in polls against his opponents Bill Clinton and George H. W. Bush . Additionally, McMullin received 21 percent of the popular vote in his home state of Utah but received little support from the remainder of the country. Independent senator Bernie Sanders ran in the 2016 and 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries , but ultimately did not appear on the ballot in either the 2016 nor 2020 presidential elections, though he did receive more than 5% of the popular vote as a write-in candidate in his home state of Vermont . \n\nIn 2008 , Nader formed Independent Parties in New Mexico , Delaware , and elsewhere to gain ballot access in several states. In 2024 , Robert F. Kennedy Jr. created \" We the People \" parties in several states for the same purpose, even though he is Independent. \n\nSeveral other candidates for federal races, including Joe Lieberman (who created Connecticut for Lieberman ), have pursued a similar strategy.\n\nIllinois , Maine , Oregon , Rhode Island , Texas , Alaska , and North Dakota have elected formally independent candidates as governor: Illinois's first two governors, Shadrach Bond and Edward Coles ; James B. Longley in 1974 as well as Angus King in 1994 and 1998 from Maine; Lincoln Chafee in 2010 from Rhode Island; Julius Meier in 1930 from Oregon; Sam Houston in 1859 from Texas; and Bill Walker in 2014 from Alaska. Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut is sometimes mentioned as an independent governor, though this is not technically correct; he ran as an A Connecticut Party candidate (which gave him better ballot placement than an unaffiliated candidate would receive), defeating the Democratic and Republican nominees. Another former governor who is sometimes mentioned as an independent is Jesse Ventura , who actually ran as a member of the Reform Party 's Minnesota affiliate, which later disaffiliated from the party and reverted to its original name, the Independence Party of Minnesota .North Dakota elected William Langer Governor in 1933 as a member of the Republican/Nonpartisan League. He was later elected Governor in 1937 as an Independent.\n\nIn 1971 , State Senator Henry Howell of Virginia , a former Democrat, was elected lieutenant governor as an independent. Two years later , he campaigned for governor as an independent, but lost by 15,000 votes.\n\nThere were several unsuccessful independent gubernatorial candidates in 2006 who impacted their electoral races. In Maine , state legislator Barbara Merrill (formerly a Democrat) received 21% of the vote. In Texas , country music singer and mystery novelist Kinky Friedman received 12.43% of the vote, and State Comptroller Carole Keeton Strayhorn received 18.13%. Strayhorn and Friedman's presence in the race resulted in a splitting of the ballot four ways between themselves and the two major parties.\n\nIn 2010 , Florida governor Charlie Crist left the Republican party and became an independent. (He later became a Democrat.) He left the Republicans because he did not want to run against former state house Speaker Marco Rubio in the Republican primary for the U.S. Senate election, preferring to run in the general. Rubio won the election, though Crist came in ahead of Democratic nominee Kendrick Meek .\n\nIn 2014 , former Honolulu mayor Mufi Hannemann ran as an independent candidate for the governorship of the State of Hawaii after previously campaigning in the state's Democratic primary. As a result, Democratic candidate David Ige was elected as governor with a plurality of 49%. Also in 2014, former mayor of Valdez , Bill Walker won the gubernatorial election. Walker retired before the 2018 election but ran again in the 2022 . He didn't win but received 20% of the vote.\n\nThe United States House of Representatives has also seen a handful of independent members . Examples include Bernie Sanders of Vermont, Virgil Goode of Virginia, Frazier Reams of Ohio , Victor Berger of Wisconsin , and Justin Amash and Paul Mitchell of Michigan .\n\nThere have been several independents elected to the United States Senate throughout history. Notable examples include David Davis of Illinois (a former Republican ) in the 19th century, and Harry F. Byrd Jr. of Virginia (who had been elected to his first term as a Democrat) in the 20th century. Some officials have been elected as members of a party but became independent while in office (without being elected as such), such as Wayne Morse of Oregon, who left the Republican party to become an independent, then joined the Democratic Party two years later. Nebraska senator George W. Norris was elected for four terms as a Republican before changing to an independent after the Republicans lost their majority in Congress in 1930. Norris won re-election as an independent in 1936, but later lost his final re-election attempt to Republican Kenneth S. Wherry in 1942.\n\nVermont senator Jim Jeffords left the Republican Party to become an independent in 2001. Jeffords's change of party status was especially significant because it shifted the Senate composition from 50 to 50 between the Republicans and Democrats (with a Republican Vice President, Dick Cheney , who would presumably break all ties in favor of the Republicans), to 49 Republicans, 50 Democrats, and one Independent. Jeffords agreed to vote for Democratic control of the Senate in exchange for being appointed chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee , and the Democrats held control of the Senate until the 2002 elections , when the Republicans regained their majority. Jeffords retired at the end of his term in 2007. Dean Barkley of the Independence Party of Minnesota was appointed a day before the 2002 elections to fill the senate seat of Paul Wellstone who, while running for re-election, died weeks prior. Barkley refused to caucus with either party.\n\nIn 2006 , independent politician Bernie Sanders won the Senate seat vacated by the retiring Jim Jeffords as an independent and was reelected in 2012 , 2018 and 2024 . He was an independent member of the United States House of Representatives for Vermont-at-large from 1991 to 2007. Sanders is the longest-serving independent member of Congress in American history. Also in 2006 , Joe Lieberman was a former Democrat and ran under a third party ( Connecticut for Lieberman Party ) after he lost the primary. After the election, Lieberman enrolled himself as an Independent Democrat until his retirement in 2013. In 2006, Sanders and Lieberman were the only two victorious independent candidates for Congress, both caucusing with the Democrats. In 2012 , Angus King was elected to the U.S. Senate as an Independent from Maine. He was reelected in 2018 and won a third term in 2024 .\n\nDuring the presidency of Joe Biden , former members of Democratic Party Kyrsten Sinema and Joe Manchin joined Sanders and King and became Independent Democrats . They are viewed as moderate Democrats and cited increasing partisanship to explain their decisions. After they changed their affiliations, the Senate had the highest number of independents in a single Congress since the ratification of the 17th Amendment . \n\nState and Local Independent Politicians\n\nIndependent politicians have also played notable roles at the state and local levels, often finding success in contexts where party affiliation is less dominant or elections are nonpartisan. \n\nMayors and Municipal Leaders\n\nThere have been many cases where independent candidates have made a large impact on elections and have even won, particularly in large cities. For instance, former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg served as 2002 to 2013 as a Republican but for his third term he won as an independent. Independent politicians have also led cities like Minneapolis , where Charles Stenvig served as an independent mayor throughout the 1970s. These leaders often emphasize pragmatic governance over party ideology, appealing to diverse voter bases.\n\nState Legislatures\n\nWhile less common than in Congress, independents occasionally serve in state legislatures. Maine and Alaska , in particular, have seen a history of independent state legislators. For example, in the Alaska State House , independents have sometimes played pivotal roles in coalition governments, demonstrating their influence in closely divided chambers. These legislators often prioritize regional or policy-specific issues over strict adherence to party platforms. \n\nJudicial and Nonpartisan Offices\n\nMany state and local offices, particularly in the judiciary, are officially nonpartisan, providing opportunities for independents to succeed. For example, state superintendents of schools or city council members are normally politicians who identify as independent or with no party at all. This system allows voters to focus on the candidate's qualifications rather than party affiliation since this should not be stressed for these positions. \n\nIn Azerbaijan , there are many independent members of the National Assembly , such as Aytən Mustafayeva . \n\nAround half of Hong Kong 's Legislative Council is made up of independents, or members whose political groups are represented by one sole member in the legislature. They are common in functional constituencies , and are not rare among geographical constituencies .\n\nIndependent candidates can contest elections on the basis of their personal appeal or to promote an ideology different from any party. In the 2024 general election , seven independent candidates were elected to Lok Sabha , the lower house of Indian Parliament . \n\nThe only independent Israeli politician elected to the Knesset was Shmuel Flatto-Sharon . \n\nIndependents have rarely been elected to the Dewan Rakyat and state legislative assemblies. In Malaysian elections, many independent candidates lose their election deposit because they had failed to secure at least 12.5% or one-eighth of the total votes cast. Independent Senators are quite rare.\n\nIn 2010, a group of independent MPs who were sacked from the People's Justice Party formed a political block called Konsensus Bebas . The members were Zahrain Mohamed Hashim (Bayan Baru), Wee Choo Keong (Wangsa Maju), Zulkifli Noordin (Kulim-Bandar Bharu), Tan Tee Beng (Nibong Tebal) and Mohsin Fadzli Samsuri (Bagan Serai). It did not last beyond the 12th General Elections.\n\nAs of May 2018 [update] , three independent MPs were elected in GE14 , but later joined Pakatan Harapan ( PKR ), thus causing no representation for independent MP for that time. However, as of June 2018 and December 2018, the number increased to 13 independent Members of Parliament that sat in the Dewan Rakyat as of December 2018.\n\nAt the same time in December 2018, almost all members from Sabah UMNO quit the party and became independent politicians.\n\nMaszlee Malik quit Homeland Fighters' Party and became an independent MP fighting for education activist.\n\nPahang State Legislative Assembly\n\nSelangor State Legislative Assembly\n\nSabah State Legislative Assembly\n\nSarawak State Legislative Assembly\n\nParliamentary independent candidates: The system in place whither the DPRK allows for independent politicians to launch their own campaigns to gain a seat in parliament. The candidates however must be approved by the Fatherland Front, being the primary party of the DPRK. To cast votes to independent candidates the voting population must do so at independent voting stations.\n\nNearly all electoral systems currently in practice in the DPRK that exist on a local level are made up of mostly independent Candidates, as the Fatherland Front and other major party's primarily operate in the urban heartland of the DPRK. On the local level of North Korean elections, alliances between independent candidates is banned. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn Nepal, there are some independent politicians, specially in local government. Independent politician and rapper Balen Shah was elected as Mayor of Kathmandu in 2022. Similarly, Harka Sampang and Gopal Hamal were also elected as Mayor of some of the major cities like Dharan and Dhangadhi , respectively. \n\nPakistan also has independent politicians standing in elections. Pakistan's Parliament has General Elections, 2008 elected 30 Members. In 2011, four candidates won seats in the National Assembly. In the 2013 General Election, nine seats were won by independents. In 2024, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf backed independent candidates won 94 seats as the party was officially banned by Election Commission of Pakistan .\n\nEver since the first elections during the 1907 Philippine Assembly elections , independents have been allowed to participate and have won seats. On that first election, independents had the most members, behind the Nacionalista Party . When the Senate was first created, its first elections in 1916 also saw independents participating and winning one seat. In the Nacionalista landslide of 1941 , the three independents were the only non-members of the Nacionalista Party to win in the House of Representatives; this was also the start of independents being shut out in the Senate.\n\nAfter independence was granted by the United States in 1946, the two-party system between the Nacionalistas and Liberal Party was established, with certain candidates who failed to get the nomination of either parties appearing on the ballot as \"Independent Nacionalista\" or \"Independent Liberal\", as the case may be. Independents not associated with any party were still able to participate and sporadically win elections. In the 1961 Philippine vice presidential election , independent Sergio Osmeña Jr. narrowly lost to Emmanuel Pelaez . The first breakthrough was in the 1967 Philippine Senate election where Magnolia Antonino , widow of Gaudencio Antonino who died on election eve, won.\n\nFerdinand Marcos declared martial law in 1972, dissolved Congress, and promulgated a new constitution that led to the 1978 Philippine parliamentary election , where one independent won, independents also won in 1984 . Marcos was overthrown after the 1986 People Power Revolution after he allegedly cheated in the 1986 Philippine presidential election . Corazon Aquino succeeded Marcos, and promulgated a new constitution that ushered in a multi-party system . Here, parties are not able to present full 12-person slates in Senate elections, thus necessitating inter-party cooperation, that included independents. The 1995 Philippine Senate election saw two independents winning: Juan Ponce Enrile (who later ran and lost the 1998 Philippine presidential election as an independent) and Gregorio Honasan , who both teamed up to stage coups during the Aquino presidency. The 2001 EDSA Revolution increased the number of major candidates running as independents, with broadcaster Noli de Castro topping the Senate election. He was a guest candidate of the opposition Pwersa ng Masa coalition but he never joined their campaign rallies. In 2004, he ran as vice president as a guest candidate of the administration K-4 coalition and won with just under majority of the vote.\n\nIn the local level, former priest Eddie Panlilio was elected as governor of Pampanga in 2007, defeating two administration candidates. When Panlilio eventually transferred to the Liberal Party in time for the 2010 election, it was ruled that he was beaten in the 2007 election; in 2010, he was defeated.\n\nIn the 2010 House of Representatives elections , seven independents were elected, although all but two joined a political party after the elections. Independents can only run in district elections, and cannot participate in party-list elections as independents.\n\nIn contesting elections, independent candidates, while can spend as much as those with parties can under the law, they are not able to tap in spending from a political party that nominated them.\n\nIndependent candidates are different from nonpartisan politicians; the former are elected in openly partisan elections, while the latter participate in nonpartisan elections such as barangay elections . Local legislatures may find itself with independent and nonpartisan members.\n\nAfter the 2018 Taiwanese local elections , there was only one independent local head:\n\nOn 6 August 2019, Ko Wen-je founded the Taiwan People's Party .\n\nAfter the 2022 Taiwanese local elections , there was one independent local head:\n\nThe President of Bulgaria Rumen Radev is an independent with support from the Bulgarian Socialist Party . Radev was elected in the 2016 presidential election . An independent politician can enter into parliament only if they gather enough votes to pass the 4% threshold, thus behaving like political parties. However, they can be part of a civic quota of a given party. Civic quotas are lists of independents candidates, who are represented on a given party's electoral list, without directly joining the party. Every party has the capability to invite independent candidates into their lists, without forcing them to join the party itself.\n\nAfter an inconclusive election in 2015 , Tihomir Orešković was named the first non-partisan Prime Minister of Croatia .\n\nAll Estonian presidents are forced to relinquish membership from any political party they may be in.\n\nMarshal C. G. E. Mannerheim , who served as the President of Finland from 1944 to 1946, did not want to be affiliated with any party. As the state regent/caretaker from December 1918 to July 1919, Mannerheim also stood as an independent in the July 1919 presidential election against the National Progressive's candidate Kaarlo Juho Ståhlberg , who won.\n\nAlso, after serving six years on his first term as the 12th President of Finland in the National Coalition Party from 2012 to 2018, Sauli Niinistö was elected for his second term in 2018 after running as an independent candidate. Sauli Niinistö's status as an independent/non-partisan president has been attributed to his historical approval ratings and popularity, which stood at 90% favorable in July 2021 of which 52% said that Niinistö had handled the presidency \"Very favorably\". \n\nIn France, independent politicians are frequently categorised as sans étiquette (\"without label\") in municipal or district elections.\n\nIn the nineteenth century and first half of the twentieth century, most French national politicians were independents. The first modern French political parties date from the early 1900s (foundation of Action Libérale and the Radical Party ). The first legislation on political parties dates from 1911, though it was not until 1928 that parliamentarians were required to select a political party for the parliamentary register (either by formally joining a group, or by loosely working with one as an apparenté , or associate), and not until after 1945 that structured political parties came to dominate parliamentary work.\n\nOnce elected, independents tended to attach themselves to a parliamentary party. In some cases independent deputies banded together to form a technical group of their own. In 1932, for instance, there were four technical groups created: the left-of-centre Independent Left , with 12 deputies; the centre-right liberal Independents of the Left , with 26 deputies; the right-wing agrarian Independents for Economic, Social and Peasant Action , with six deputies; and the far-right monarchist Independent Group , with 12 deputies—these four technical groups thus accounted for one-tenth of deputies. In addition, the larger parliamentary parties, including the socialist SFIO, centre-left PRRRS, centre-right ARD and conservative FR all included a greater or lesser number of independents who sat with their group for parliamentary work ( apparentés ).\n\nIn 1920, Alexandre Millerand was elected president of the Republic under the banner \"without label\".\n\nHowever, it is nowadays rare to have independent politicians at national level, if only because independents usually affiliate themselves to an existing political grouping. Noteworthy independents include José Bové in the 2007 presidential election . Emmanuel Macron was an independent politician as Minister, but formed his own party to stand in the 2017 presidential election .\n\nFrom 2001 to 2008, \"without label\" was no longer used in the nomenclature of the Ministry of the Interior . Candidates and lists presenting themselves as \"without label\" are classified in DVG (various left), DVD (various right), DVC (various center) or AUT (other) according to their political sensitivity. Therefore, from 2008 onwards, the DIV (miscellaneous) or the LDIV code for the \"miscellaneous\" list has been created to group unclassifiable or categorical interests and, by default, mayors without a declared label claiming no political sensitivity, be it left, center or right. The AUT (other) grade replaces the DIV grade without changing its definition. \n\nSalome Zourabichvili won the 2018 Georgian presidential election as an independent candidate, becoming the first-ever female President of Georgia .\n\nJoachim Gauck , President of Germany from March 2012 to March 2017 and the first Federal President without party affiliation, was to date the most prominent independent politician. In the German presidential election of 2010 he was the candidate of the Social Democrats and Greens , in 2012 the candidate of all major parties except The Left . His presidency—though his powers are limited—constitutes an exception, as Independent politicians have rarely held high office in German history, at least not since World War II . It has nevertheless happened that a presidential candidate without any chances of election by the Federal Convention was not a party member: for example, in 1984 the Greens came up with the writer Luise Rinser .\n\nIn the Bundestag parliament nearly all deputies belong to a political party. The voting system of personalized proportional representation (since 1949) allows any individual holding the passive right to vote to stand for a direct mandate in the electoral districts —299 of the seats in parliament are distributed by districts according to a plurality voting system . Such a candidate has to present 200 signatures in favor of their candidacy, the same as a candidate of a party that had no parliamentary presentation previously. The first Bundestag election in 1949 saw three independents elected; since then, no party-independent candidate has won a seat. At state level, the situation is more or less the same: only party members have a real chance to be elected to a Landtag legislature, and state ministers without party membership are just as rare as at the federal level. However, in local elections it may occur that an independent politician is elected deputy to districts ', cities' and municipalities' assemblies, as well as member of a city council or even mayor , especially in Northern Germany . In recent years, independents have formed Free Voters associations which have had success in local governments. Two such associations have managed to enter state parliaments: the Free Voters of Bavaria in 2008 and the Brandenburg United Civic Movements/Free Voters in 2019.\n\nAn independent member of parliament, who also is not a member of a voters' association, holds the status of fraktionsloser Abgeordneter , i.e., not affiliated to any parliamentary group . A representative who either leaves their party (and their parliamentary group) or is expelled from it and does not join another becomes fraktionslos . In 1989 the Bundestag MP Thomas Wüppesahl , who had left the Green Party in 1987 and was excluded from the Green parliamentary group the next year, obtained more rights as a fraktionsloser Abgeordneter , for example more talking time and representation in a subcommittee, when the Federal Constitutional Court decided partially in their favor.\n\nAfter the German unification of 1871, the first Reich Chancellors ( heads of government ) de jure served as executive officers of the German Imperial states as non-partisans, usually recruited from the traditional bureaucratic, aristocratic or military elites. In the fierce political conflicts during the Weimar period after World War I , several chancellors and Reich Ministers also had no party affiliation: these chancellors were Wilhelm Cuno (1922–1923), Hans Luther (1925–1926), the former Centre politician Franz von Papen (1932), and Kurt von Schleicher (1932–1933). The last two cabinets appointed by Reich President Paul von Hindenburg , a non-partisan (though strongly Conservative ) himself, were regarded as apolitical cabinets of experts with regard to the rise of the Nazi Party ; many of the ministers were not party members.\n\nSince World War II, only two ministers of (West) German cabinets have not been party members, though \"on the ticket\" of the major party in the coalition, the Social Democrats: Education Minister Hans Leussink (1969–1972), and Minister of Economy Werner Müller (1998–2002). Minister of Justice Klaus Kinkel only shortly after his appointment joined the Free Democrats in 1991. A special case is the former Federal Minister and Chancellor Ludwig Erhard , whose affiliation with the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) has not been conclusively established: although he served as Minister of Economics from 1949 to 1963 and as Federal Chancellor from 1963 to 1966, and was even elected CDU party chairman in 1966, it seems that he never signed a membership form or paid contributions. Researches by Der Stern magazine have revealed a record at the CDU party archives created only in 1968, with the faked date of entry of early March 1949. \n\nThe President of Iceland (currently Halla Tómasdóttir ) is independent. By convention, presidents of Iceland usually relinquish any party membership prior to or upon taking office.\n\nIn Ireland, constituency-based proportional representation, the comparative looseness of formal parties, and strong local sentiment have meant that independents have formed a significant part of the parliamentary landscape since the foundation of the state : in the early elections to Dáil Éireann (parliament), independents accounted for 7% of seats in 1922 , 8.5% in 1923 , 10.5% in 1927 , and 9% in 1932 , though with the development of relatively more structured parties their numbers declined thereafter. These were similar proportions to the number of independents elected to other interwar European democracies such as France (see above).\n\nIt was not until the 2010s that independents would see a similar electoral success, with record scores for independents surpassing the previous interwar highs.\n\nAfter the Irish general election in 2020 , there were 23 independent TDs (parliamentary deputies) in the Dáil (the lower house of the Irish parliament), representing 14% of the total.\n\nThere are ten independent senators in the 26th Seanad (the upper house of the Irish parliament), representing 16% of the total. Two of these are elected by the graduates of the National University of Ireland and three from Dublin University . There is also one independent senator who was nominated by the Taoiseach and four elected by the technical panels.\n\nThe majority of the elected representatives in the Isle of Man are independents.\n\nThe Prime Ministers Carlo Azeglio Ciampi (1993–1994), Lamberto Dini (1995–1996), Giuliano Amato (2000–2001), Mario Monti (2011–2013), Giuseppe Conte (2018–2021) and Mario Draghi (2021–2022) were independent when they were in office. Ciampi was also the President of Italy between 1999 and 2006. President Sergio Mattarella , despite being a former member of the Christian Democracy and of the Democratic Party , was elected president in 2015 as an independent (he was member of the Constitutional Court at the moment of his election).\n\nThe majority of the elected representatives in Jersey are independents.\n\nAtifete Jahjaga was elected the first female and Independent President of Kosovo since the 2008 Kosovo declaration of independence . She was also the first female and independent elected leader in the whole of the Balkans .\n\nAccording to the 1862 Constitution of Liechtenstein , the appointed Governor of Liechtenstein was required to be politically non-aligned with any party in both Austria and Liechtenstein. Regardless, however, no political parties existed in Liechtenstein until 1918 and all members of the Landtag of Liechtenstein were elected as independents. Under the currently used 1921 Constitution of Liechtenstein , independent candidates are allowed to run for both the Landtag and prime minister, though an independent candidate has not been elected to either position since 1921. \n\nDick Schoof has been the independent Prime Minister of the Netherlands since 2024.\n\nThe Polish Sejm is elected by party-list ordination, which does not allow lone candidates to run, although since 2001 there has been a possibility to create a non-partisan Voters' Electoral Committee (pol. KWW , komitet wyborczy wyborców ); they are by almost any means party lists, but no officially registered party is behind them. They can be unregistered parties, e.g. Kukiz'15 , or non-partisan movements, although the latter never reached the 5% threshold. National minorities candidates also form Voters' Electoral Committees (like German Minority Electoral Committee , represented in Sejm between 1991 and 2023), but they do not have to reach the nationwide threshold. However, during a Sejm term many members switch parties or become independents.\n\nTickets such as Civic Platform during the 2001 election were formally non-partisan, Civic Platform was widely viewed as a de facto political party, as it is now.\n\nThe situation in the Senate is different, as the voting system allows independents to run as single candidates and some are elected in their own right. In the last parliamentary election ( 2023 ) four independents won seats in the Senate.\n\nThree presidents since 1990 have technically been independents. Lech Wałęsa was not an endorsed candidate of any party, but the chairman of the Solidarity and he was elected without full support of this union (Solidarity votes split between him and Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki ). Aleksander Kwaśniewski was a leader of the Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland , but formally resigned from the party after he was elected, as did Lech Kaczyński , who was the first leader of Law and Justice , Bronisław Komorowski ( PO ) and Andrzej Duda ( PiS ). The resignation is required because the Constitution says that the president shall hold no other offices nor discharge any public functions. The aforementioned presidents often participated in their party's campaigns (e.g. Andrzej Duda in the Law and Justice campaign three months after his resignation from the party).\n\nMarcelo Rebelo de Sousa , the current president of Portugal since 6 March 2016, was elected on 24 January 2016 while being a leading member of the Social Democratic Party , but suspended his political affiliation on the day of his swearing-in . \n\nAll of Russia's presidents have been independents. Former president Dmitry Medvedev declined an offer to join United Russia , saying that he believes the President should be an independent so that he serves the interests of the country rather than his political party.\n\nVladimir Putin , the current president of Russia, was the head of the United Russia party until 26 May 2012, but even then was not its member, thus formally was and still is independent.\n\nThe Swedish election system is based on parties nominating candidate MPs for their party ballots, and each party has to receive 4% or more of the national vote (or 12% in one region, which has never happened independently of also reaching the different 4% threshold). This makes running as an independent MP impossible. Once elected, the seat is personal; MPs may resign their party membership, or be stripped of it, while retaining their Riksdag seats to become independent to become what is commonly referred to as a politisk vilde ( political savage ) symbol: (-).\n\nIn the Government (executive cabinet), there is no requirement for ministers to be MPs, or even have a political affiliation (though this has overwhelmingly been the case in modern times). This means that even the Prime Minister could technically be an independent if chosen by the Riksdag.\n\nThe Registration of Political Parties Act 1998 laid down the first specific rules in the United Kingdom relating to the use of the term 'independent' by election candidates. That Act was repealed with most of its contents covered by Part II of the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 . Candidates standing for United Kingdom local elections and United Kingdom parliamentary elections, including the devolved parliaments and assemblies, can use the name of a registered political party, or the term 'Independent' (or its Welsh language equivalent annibynol ) or no ballot paper description at all. \n\nSome groups in the United Kingdom who are not affiliated to any national or regional party have registered locality-based political parties. Some English examples are the Independent Kidderminster Hospital and Health Concern , the Epsom and Ewell Residents Association , the Devizes Guardians , the Derwentside Independents , and the East Yorkshire Independents . \n\nBefore the twentieth century, it was fairly common for independents to be elected to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom , but there have been very few since 1945. S. O. Davies , a veteran Labour MP, held his Merthyr Tydfil seat in the 1970 general election , standing as an independent, after the Labour Party had deselected him.\n\nJournalist Martin Bell was elected at Tatton in the general election of 1997 , having stood on an anti-corruption platform, defeating incumbent Neil Hamilton . He was the first independent to be newly elected to the Commons since 1951 . He stood unsuccessfully in a different constituency in 2001.\n\nAt the 2001 general election , Richard Taylor of the Independent Kidderminster Hospital and Health Concern party was elected for the constituency of Wyre Forest . Taylor was re-elected for Wyre Forest at the 2005 general election , becoming the only independent in recent times to have been elected for a second term.\n\nTwo independent (or local party) members of parliament were elected in the 2005 election , although both were defeated five years later. In the same election, Peter Law was elected as an independent at Blaenau Gwent . Law died on 25 April 2006: the resulting by-election elected Dai Davies of the local party Blaenau Gwent People's Voice . The by-election was unusual as it was the first time in over eighty years that an independent had held a seat previously occupied by another independent.\n\nOnly one independent was elected to the Commons in the 2010 , 2015 and 2017 elections : Sylvia Hermon , the member for North Down , a Unionist who left the Ulster Unionist Party because of its links with the Conservatives .\n\nThere have also been several instances of politicians being elected to the Commons as representatives of a political party, then resigning the party's whip, or having it withdrawn. Examples in this in the 2010–2015 parliament included Mike Hancock (formerly a Liberal Democrat ), Eric Joyce (formerly Labour) and Nadine Dorries , a Conservative who had the whip withdrawn for part of the parliament and thus sat as an independent during that time.\n\nIndependent candidates often stand in British parliamentary elections, often with platforms about specific local issues, but usually without success. An example from the 2001 general election was Aston Villa supporter Ian Robinson, who stood as an independent in the Sutton Coldfield constituency in protest at the way chairman Doug Ellis ran the football club. Another example an independent candidate, in the Salisbury constituency , is Arthur Uther Pendragon , a local activist and self-declared reincarnation of King Arthur .\n\nOther independent candidates are associated with a political party and may be former members of it, but cannot stand under its label. For instance, for several months after being expelled from the Labour Party but before the Respect Coalition was founded, George Galloway MP described himself as \"Independent Labour\".\n\nOn 23 March 2005, the Independent Network was set up to support independent candidates in the forthcoming general election. The Independent Network still supports Independent candidates in local, regional, national and European elections. It has an organic [ clarification needed ] set of principles which are known as the Bell Principles and are very closely related to Lord Nolan's Standards of Public Life . The Independent Network does not impose any ideology or political influence on their candidates.\n\nIn March 2009, the multi-millionaire Paul Judge established the Jury Team , an umbrella organisation dedicated to increasing the number of independent candidates standing in Britain, in both national and European elections. \n\nIn 2024, a record of six independent candidates was elected to the 59th parliament. \n\nPart II of the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 allows individuals who wish to stand as a candidate to all parliaments and assemblies in the UK, including the House of Commons, the right to use one of three ballot paper descriptions. Those descriptions are the name of a registered political party; the word \"independent\"; or no description at all. \n\nUnless a candidate stands as \"independent\" or as a \"No Description\" candidate leaving the ballot paper description box blank, their candidature must be confirmed by a signed certificate from the relevant officer from a registered political party, as set out in Section 52 of the Electoral Administration Act 2006 . \n\nThe House of Lords includes many peers independent from political parties. Some are simply not affiliated with any grouping, whilst another, larger, grouping is given the official designation of crossbenchers . Additionally the Lords Spiritual (bishops of the Church of England ) do not have party affiliations.\n\nIn the 2003 Scottish Parliamentary elections , three MSPs were elected as Independents: Dennis Canavan ( Falkirk West ), Jean Turner ( Strathkelvin and Bearsden ) and Margo MacDonald ( Lothians ). In 2004 Campbell Martin ( West of Scotland region ) left the Scottish National Party to become an independent and in 2005 Brian Monteith ( Mid Scotland and Fife ) left the Conservative Party to become an independent. At the 2007 Scottish Parliamentary elections Margo MacDonald was again returned as an independent MSP and was elected as an independent for the third time four years later . She died in 2014 while still serving as member of the Parliament. As she was elected as an independent regional MSP, there could be no by-election and her seat remained vacant until the 2016 election . \n\nPeter Law was expelled from the Labour Party after standing against an official Labour candidate in Blaenau Gwent at the 2005 UK general election and became an independent in the National Assembly and UK Parliament. In 2006 Peter Law died from a brain tumour and his wife, Trish Law , campaigned and took the seat as an independent candidate at the subsequent by-election and held onto the seat again in the 2007 Welsh Assembly elections .\n\nIn 2016, Nathan Gill as the then leader of UKIP Wales defected from the group to sit as an independent after a falling out with Neil Hamilton , who was elected UKIP Assembly group leader. Dafydd Elis-Thomas left the Plaid Cymru group later in 2016 after multiple fallings out with Plaid Cymru leader Leanne Wood . Elis-Thomas said his reason for leaving Plaid Cymru was that it not serious about working with the Welsh Labour Government. Neil McEvoy was expelled from Plaid Cymru on 16 January 2018 and sat as an independent AM until 2021. Nathan Gill stood down on 27 December 2017 and was replaced by Mandy Jones . Mandy Jones left the UKIP group on 9 January 2018 over a fallout over her staff. \n\nThe introduction of directly elected mayors in several parts of England has witnessed the election of independents to run councils in Stoke-on-Trent , Middlesbrough , Bedford , Hartlepool and Mansfield . The first Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone , was first elected as an independent, having run against the official Labour candidate Frank Dobson . He was subsequently re-admitted to the Labour Party in December 2003 before his first re-election campaign.\n\nIndependent candidates frequently stand and are elected to local councils. There is a special Independent group of the Local Government Association to cater for them. A number of local authorities have been entirely or almost entirely composed of independent members, such as the City of London Corporation , the Isles of Scilly Council , Orkney Islands Council , Shetland Islands Council and Comhairle nan Eilean Siar (Western Isles Council) in the Outer Hebrides .\n\nIn 2023 , Central Bedfordshire became the first unitary authority in England to have an independent administration. \n\nRoughly a quarter of the police and crime commissioners elected in England and Wales in the 2012 election were independents. \n\nIndependents are a recurrent feature of the federal Parliament of Australia , and they are more commonly elected to state parliaments. There have been up to five independents in every federal parliament since 1990, and independents have won twenty-eight times during national elections in that time. A large proportion of independents are former members of one of Australia's four main parties, the Australian Labor Party , the Liberal Party of Australia , the Australian Greens , or the National Party of Australia . In 2013 a political party named the Australian Independents was registered with the Australian Electoral Commission . \n\nAt the dissolution of parliament before the 2019 federal election , four independents sat in the Australian House of Representatives : Andrew Wilkie (Member for Denison ), Cathy McGowan (Member for Indi ), Kerryn Phelps (Member for Wentworth ), and Julia Banks (Member for Chisholm ). Of these, Wilkie had previously been a Greens candidate, McGowan had been a Liberal staffer, and Banks was elected as a Liberal MP before resigning from the party in November 2018. At the 2019 election, Wilkie was re-elected as the Member for Clark , while McGowan retired, and both Phelps and Banks lost their seats. However, two new independents entered parliament: Zali Steggall (Member for Warringah ) and Helen Haines (Member for Indi ).\n\nAfter the 2022 federal election , a record ten independents were elected to the House of Representatives, including re-elected members Andrew Wilkie ( Clark ), Zali Steggall ( Warringah ), and Helen Haines ( Indi ). Seven new independents were elected to the House of Representatives: Dai Le ( Fowler ), Zoe Daniel ( Goldstein ), Monique Ryan ( Kooyong ), Allegra Spender ( Wentworth ), Kate Chaney ( Curtin ), Kylea Tink ( North Sydney ), and Sophie Scamps ( Mackellar ). Several of the newly elected independents have been branded Teal independents , due to their use of the colour teal in campaigning material, similar policy platforms and support from Climate 200 . \n\nIndependent senators are quite rare. In modern politics, Independent Brian Harradine served from 1975 to 2005 with considerable influence at times. Nick Xenophon was the only elected independent senator after his election to the Senate at the 2007 federal election and was re-elected for another six-year term at the 2013 federal election . He resigned from the Australian Senate in 2017 to contest a seat in the House of Assembly of South Australia. DLP Senator John Madigan became an independent senator in September 2014, but lost his seat in the 2016 election . PUP Senators Jacqui Lambie and Glenn Lazarus became Independent senators in November 2014 and March 2015 respectively. Lambie was re-elected in 2019 with the support of the Jacqui Lambie Network . At the 2022 Australian federal election , independent senator for the ACT David Pocock was elected, becoming the first independent senator from a territory. \n\nOriginally, there were no recognised parties in the New Zealand parliament, although loose groupings did exist informally (initially between supporters of central government versus provincial governments, and later between liberals and conservatives). The foundation of formal political parties, starting at the end of the 19th century, considerably diminished the number of unaffiliated politicians, although a smaller number of independent candidates continued to be elected up until the 1940s. Since then, however, there have been relatively few independent politicians in Parliament. No independent candidate has won or held a seat in a general election since 1943 , although two independent candidates have been successful in by-elections (in all cases after having held the seats in question as partisan candidates up until that point). Other politicians have become independents in the course of a parliamentary term, but not been voted into office as such.\n\nThe last person to be directly elected to Parliament as an independent in New Zealand was Winston Peters , who won the 1993 by-election in Tauranga electorate as an independent after having previously held it a member of the National Party . By the time of the next general election , he had formed his own party ( New Zealand First ), and thus was no longer standing as an independent. Since that time, the only independents in Parliament have been people who quit or were expelled from their original party but retained their seats without going through a by-election. Some have gone on to found or co-found their own parties, with varying levels of success—examples include Peter Dunne , Taito Phillip Field , Gordon Copeland , Tau Henare , and Alamein Kopu . Others have joined parties which were then outside Parliament, such as Frank Grover and Tuariki Delamere .\n\nThere were two independent MPs in the 49th New Zealand Parliament : Chris Carter and Hone Harawira . Carter became an independent after his criticisms of the Labour Party 's leadership resulted in his being expelled from the Labour caucus, while Harawira resigned from the Māori Party and, after a short period as an independent, also resigned as an MP in order to force the 2011 by-election when he was re-elected as representative of his new political party, Mana and retained the seat in the 2011 General Election. There were also two other parties which had only a single MP: United Future with Peter Dunne and ACT with David Seymour . Neither Dunne nor Seymour was classed as an independent—Dunne's presence in Parliament was due to personal votes in his home electorate, and Seymour's presence was as the sole elected MP of ACT because of a collapse in their support in the 2011 election . In the 50th New Zealand Parliament there was one independent MP: Brendan Horan , a former New Zealand First MP who was expelled from his party because of allegations of misappropriation of family assets.\n\nPeter Dunne effectively became an Independent MP for a short period after his United Future political party was deregistered on 25 June 2013 by the Electoral Commission, as the party no longer had the required minimum of 500 members. The party was subsequently re-registered two months later. \n\nIn Niue , there have been no political parties since 2003, when the Niue People's Party disbanded, and all politicians are de facto independents. The government depends on an informal coalition. ",
  "A blackwater river is a type of river with a slow-moving channel flowing through forested swamps or wetlands . Most major blackwater rivers are in the Amazon Basin and the Southern United States . The term is used in fluvial studies, geology , geography , ecology , and biology . Not all dark rivers are blackwater in that technical sense. Some rivers in temperate regions, which drain or flow through areas of dark black loam , are simply black due to the color of the soil; these rivers are black mud rivers . There are also black mud estuaries .\n\nBlackwater rivers are lower in nutrients than whitewater rivers and have ionic concentrations higher than rainwater. The unique conditions lead to flora and fauna that differ from both whitewater and clearwater rivers . The classification of Amazonian rivers into black, clear, and whitewater was first proposed by Alfred Russel Wallace in 1853 based on water colour, but the types were more clearly defined by chemistry and physics by Harald Sioli [ de ] from the 1950s to the 1980s. Although many Amazonian rivers fall clearly into one of these categories, others show a mix of characteristics and may vary depending on season and flood levels. \n\nBlack and white waters differ significantly in their ionic composition, as shown in Table 1 . Black waters are more acidic , resulting in an aluminum concentration greater than that of the more neutral white waters. The major difference is the concentrations of sodium , magnesium , calcium , and potassium ; these are very low in black waters. This has ecological implications. Some animals need more calcium than is available in blackwaters, so for example, snails , which need much calcium to build shells, are not abundant in blackwaters. The lack of dissolved ions in black waters results in a low conductivity , similar to that of rainwater. [ citation needed ]\n\nBlack and white waters differ in their planktonic fauna and flora. Tables 2 and 3 compare the number of planktonic animals caught in black and white water localities only a few meters apart. The black water was not as extreme an example as the Rio Negro system. However, it can be seen that the black water held greater numbers of rotifers but fewer crustaceans and mites . These crustaceans are important foods for larval fish . The zones where the two waters mix are attractive to ostracods and young fish. These mixing zones tend to have many animals. The abundance is shown in Table 3, which compares animals in 10 litres (2.2 imp gal; 2.6 US gal) of water. \n\nBlackwater rivers resemble clearwater rivers in having a low conductivity and relatively low levels of dissolved solids , but clearwater rivers have water that often only is somewhat acidic (typical pH ~6.5) and very clear with a greenish color. The main Amazonian clearwater rivers have their source in the Brazilian Plateau (such as Tapajós , Tocantins , Xingu and some right tributaries of the Madeira ), but some originate in the Guiana Shield (such as Nhamundá , Paru , and Araguari ). \n\nOther rivers in Australia may experience infrequent 'blackwater events' associated with flood waters connecting to forested floodplains and these events may be associated with hypoxic waters [low oxygen]. Examples include the Murray River , Edward River , Wakool River and Murrumbidgee River . ",
  "The hanbok ( Korean : 한복 ; Hanja : 韓服 ; lit. 'Korean dress') is the traditional clothing of the Korean people . The term hanbok is primarily used by South Koreans; North Koreans refer to the clothes as chosŏnot ( 조선옷 ; lit. Korean clothes). The clothes are also worn in the Korean diaspora . Koryo-saram —ethnic Koreans living in the lands of the former Soviet Union—also retained a hanbok tradition. \n\nKoreans have worn hanbok since antiquity. The earliest visual depictions of hanbok can be traced back to the Three Kingdoms of Korea period (57 BCE to 668 CE) with roots in the Proto-Koreanic people of what is now northern Korea and Manchuria . The clothes are also depicted on tomb murals from the Goguryeo period (4th to 6th century CE), with the basic structure of the hanbok established since at latest this period. The ancient hanbok consisted of a jeogori (top), baji (trousers), chima (skirt), and the po (coat). The basic structure of hanbok was developed to facilitate ease of movement; it integrated many motifs of Mu-ism . \n\nFor thousands of years, the hanbok most people wore was pure white with no ornamentation. More ornate hanbok was typically reserved for special occasions such as weddings. The color white was seen as pure. In some periods, commoners ( seomin ) were even forbidden from wearing colorful hanbok regularly. : 104 However, on the other hand, during the Joseon dynasty and the 1910–1945 Japanese occupation of Korea , there was also an attempt to ban white clothes and to encourage non-bleached dyed clothes, which ultimately failed. \n\nModern hanbok are typically patterned after the hanbok worn in the Joseon period, especially those worn by the nobility and royalty. : 104 There is some regional variation in hanbok design between South Korea, North Korea, and Koreans in China as a result of the relative isolation from each other that these groups experienced in the late-20th century. : 246 Despite this, the designs have somewhat converged again since the 1990s, especially due to increased cultural and economic exchange after the Chinese economic reform : 246 of 1978 onwards. Nowadays, contemporary Koreans wear hanbok for formal or semi-formal occasions and for events such as weddings, festivals, celebrations, and ceremonies. In 1996, the South Korean Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism established Hanbok Day to encourage South Korean citizens to wear the hanbok. \n\nThe term hanbok appeared relatively recently and is connected with the historical context in which it appeared. The term emerged in the late Joseon period, when the Empire of Japan and other western countries competed to place Korea under their own sphere of influence. The first known use of the term is in an 1881 document from the late Joseon period entitled Chŏngch'iilgi ( 《정치일기》 ). There, hanbok is used to distinguish Korean clothing from Japanese- and Western-style clothing. Hanbok was again used in an 1895 document to distinguish between Korean and Japanese clothing. These two usages predate the Korean Empire's popularization of the use of the hanja character Han ( Hanja : 韓 ) to describe the Korean people.\n\nBeginning in 1900, Korean newspapers used the hanja character Han in words that described Korean clothing, such as Han'gugŭibok ( 한국의복 ), Han'gugyebok ( 한국예복 ), and Taehannyŏbok ( 대한녀복 ). Hanbok was used in a 1905 newspaper article to describe the clothing of one of the righteous armies . Other words with similar meanings, such as uri-ot ( 우리옷 ) and chosŏn-ot ( 조선옷 ), were concurrently used.\n\nSince the division of Korea , South Korea has preferred the term hanbok while North Korea has preferred the term Chosŏn-ot . This reflects the general trend of South Korea's preference for the term Han and North Korea's for Chosŏn .\n\nFor women, traditional hanbok consists of the jeogori (top) and the chima (skirt). The ensemble is often known as ' chima jeogori ' . For men, hanbok consist of jeogori and loose-fitting baji (trousers). \n\nThere are also a variety of vests, jackets and coats on top of this ensemble. For women, there are Jangsam , Dansam , Wonsam , and more. For men, some examples are durumagi , dopo , Danryeong-ui , Joong-chimak , Sochang-ui , Daechang-ui , etc.\n\nThe jeogori ( 저고리 ) is the basic upper garment of the hanbok, worn by both men and women. It covers the arms and upper part of the wearer's body. \n\nThere are various styles and types of jeogori varying in fabric, sewing technique, and shape. The basic form of a jeogori consists of gil , git , dongjeong , goreum and sleeves. Gil ( 길 ) is the large section of the garment on both front and back sides, and git ( 깃 ) is a band of fabric that trims the collar. Dongjeong ( 동정 ) is a removable white collar placed over the end of the git and is generally squared off. The goreum ( 고름 ) are fabric-strings that tie the jeogori . Women's jeogori may have kkeutdong ( 끝동 ), a different colored cuff placed at the end of the sleeves. Contemporary jeogori are presently designed with various lengths.\n\nGoreum ( 고름 ) refers to the strings that fasten clothes together.\n\nTraditionally, there are many types of goreum. Fabric goreum was potentially used since Gojoseon . They were originally practical but often decorative. Silla had regulations against types of Dae (belts) and decorative goreum for each Golpoom . Southern parts of Korea, including Silla , had a colorful goreum on the front of the neck, which influenced Yayoi culture. Parts of Goguryeo style had a fabric goreum loop around the waist with a decorative ribbon to the side like a belt. Generally, thin and short ones were used on the inside and more decorative, colourful ones were used on the outside. Since the early form of the jeogori was usually wrapped across the front, the outside goreum was placed on the side of the wearer, below the armpit. Starting in Joseon dynasty , the goreum slowly moved to the front of the jeogori . In the 20th century, the goreum became the commonly known long and wide decorative ribbons on the front of the jeogori and was coined the Ot-goreum.\n\nDanchu (buttons) can also be used as an alternative to goreum .\n\nThere are many types of danchu . One example is the maedeup-danchu which was often used to keep symmetrical collars together in the front and used for practical uses on military uniforms and court uniforms. They have long horizontal lines on either side like Manchurian buttons or look like a ball and lasso. Magoja-danchu are often big decorative metal, gems or stones buttons usually on jjokki (vest). \n\nChima ( 치마 ) refers to \"skirt\", and is also called sang ( 裳 ) or gun ( 裙 ) in hanja . The underskirt, or petticoat layer, is called sokchima . Chima-malgi is the waistband that trims the top of the chima . Chima was typically made from rectangular panels that were pleated or gathered into the chima-malgi (waistband). This waistband also had goreum strings for fastening the skirt around the body. From the Goguryeo to Joseon periods, chima have been striped, pleated, patchworked, and gored . \n\nSokchima was largely made in a traditional way until the early 20th century when shoulder straps were added, later developing into a sleeveless bodice or \"reformed\" petticoat called eokkaeheorichima . By the mid-20th century, some outer chima also gained a sleeveless bodice, which was then covered by the jeogori . [ unreliable source? ] [ unreliable source? ]\n\nBaji ( 바지 ) refers to the bottom part of the men's hanbok. It is the term for \"trousers\" in Korean. Compared to western style pants, baji does not fit tightly. The roomy design is aimed at making the clothing ideal for sitting on the floor and an ethnic style that dates back to the Three Kingdoms period . It functions as modern trousers do and the term baji is commonly used in Korea to refer to every kind of pants.\n\nThe baji-malgi is a waistband of the baji that has a long string of goreum .\n\nBaji can be unlined trousers, leather trousers, silk pants, or cotton pants, depending on the style of dress, sewing method, embroidery and so on.\n\nSokgot ( 속옷 ) is a collective noun for various types of traditional Korean undergarments . They were worn as part of a hanbok before the import of Western-style underwear. Women usually wore several layers of undergarments, the more layers they had the richer they were. Undergarments were considered very important, thus it happened that the quality and material of the underwear were better than that of the visible outer layers. \n\nDeot-ot refers to a category of outer layers worn on top of the jeogori . There are many varieties other than the ones listed here.\n\nPo ( 포 ; 袍 ) is a generic term referring to an outer robe or overcoat . There are two general types of po , the Korean type and the Chinese type. The Korean type is a common style from the Three Kingdoms of Korea period, and it is used in the modern day. The Chinese type consist of different types of po from mainland China. \n\nDurumagi is a type of po that was worn for protection against the cold. It has been widely worn as an outer robe over jeogori and baji . It is also called jumagui , juchaui , or juui . \n\nBanbi ( 반비 ; 半臂 , lit. 'half sleeve') are a type Hanfu that originated from the Tang dynasty . Banbi refers to a variety of short-sleeved garments worn on top of inner garments, typically the Yuanling pao (Chinese: 圓領袍, 'round collar robe'). Numerous outer half-sleeved Banbi can be seen in ancient Tang-era paintings, murals, and statues. \n\nA sleeveless outer garment that was derived from Mongolian clothing worn during the Goryeo period. \n\nBaeja refers to sleeveless outer garments that are worn on top of inner garments. It can be different lengths, short to long. Kwaeja is interchangeable with baeja, but kwaeja often refers to men's clothing.\n\nThe dapho ( 도포 ; 道袍 ) is a short-sleeved men's outer garment, often part of military uniform or official uniform.\n\nJokki ( 조끼 ) is a type of vest , while magoja is an outer jacket. The jokki was created around the late Joseon dynasty , as Western culture began to affect Korea.\n\nMagoja ( 마고자 ) does not have a git , the band of fabric trimming the collar. The magoja for men sometimes has seop ( 섶 , overlapped column on the front) and is longer than women's magoja , with both sides open at the bottom. A magoja can be made of silk and often adorned with danchu which are usually made from amber . In men's magoja , buttons are attached to the right side, as opposed to the left as in women's magoja . \n\nIt was introduced to Korea after Heungseon Daewongun , the father of King Gojong , returned from his political exile in Tianjin in 1887. Long-sleeved magoja were derived from the magwae he wore in exile because of the cold climate there. Owing to its warmth and ease of wear, magoja became popular in Korea. It is also called \"deot jeogori\" (literally 'an outer jeogori ') or magwae . \n\nTraditionally, Kkachi durumagi (literally 'a magpie's overcoat') were worn as seolbim ( 설빔 ), new clothing and shoes worn on the Korean celebration of Korean New Year , while at present, it is worn as a ceremonial garment for dol , the celebration for a baby's first birthday. It is a children's colorful overcoat. It was worn mostly by young boys. The clothes is also called obangjang durumagi which means \"an overcoat of five directions\". It was worn over jeogori (a jacket) and jokki (a vest), while the wearer could put jeonbok (a long vest) over it. Kkachi durumagi was also worn along with headgear such as bokgeon (a peaked cloth hat), hogeon (peaked cloth hat with a tiger pattern) for young boys or gulle (decorative headgear) for young girls. [ need quotation to verify ] \n\nThe clothing of Korea's rulers and aristocrats after CE 7, was influenced by both foreign and indigenous styles, including significant influences from various Chinese dynasties , resulting in some styles of clothing, such as the simui from Song dynasty , gwanbok (관복 or 단령) worn by male officials were generally adopted from and/or influenced by the court clothing system of the Tang , Song , and Ming dynasties , and Court clothing of women in the court and women of royalty were adapted from the clothing style of Tang and Ming dynasties. The cheolick , which originated in Mongolia, was described in 15th century Korea as gifts from the Ming dynasty or as military uniforms. \n\nThe cultural exchange was also bilateral and Goryeo hanbok had a cultural influence on some clothing of Yuan dynasty worn by the upper class (i.e. the clothing worn by Mongol royal women's clothing and in the Yuan imperial court ). Commoners were less influenced by these foreign fashion trends, and mainly wore a style of indigenous clothing distinct from that of the upper classes. \n\nThe choice of hanbok can also signal social position. Bright colors, for example, were generally worn by children and girls, and muted hues by middle-aged men and women. Unmarried women often wore yellow jeogori and red chima while matrons wore green and red, and women with sons donned navy. The upper classes wore a variety of colours. Contrastingly, commoners were required to wear white, but dressed in shades of pale pink, light green, gray and charcoal on special occasions.\n\nThe material of the hanbok also signaled status. The upper classes dressed in hanbok of closely woven ramie cloth or other high grade lightweight materials in warmer months and of plain and patterned silks throughout the remainder of the year. Commoners, in contrast, were restricted to cotton. Patterns were embroidered on hanbok to represent the wishes of the wearer. Peonies on a wedding dress, represented a wish for honor and wealth. Lotus flowers symbolized a hope for nobility, and bats and pomegranates showed the desire for children. Dragons, phoenixes, cranes and tigers were only for royalty and high-ranking officials. \n\nIn addition, special variants were made for officials and shamans. \n\nThe earliest visual depictions of hanbok can be traced back to the Three Kingdoms of Korea period (57 BCE to 668 CE). The origin of ancient hanbok can be found in the ancient clothing of what is now today's Northern Korea and Manchuria . Some hypothesize that the hanbok of antiquity can trace its origin to nomadic clothing of the Eurasian Steppes ( Scythian clothing ), spanning across Siberia from western Asia to Northeast Asia, interconnected by the Steppe Route . Reflecting its nomadic origins in western and northern Asia, ancient hanbok shared structural similarities with hobok type clothing of the nomadic cultures in East Asia , designed to facilitate horse-riding and ease of movement, such as the use of trousers and jacket for male clothing and the use of left closure in its jacket. However, although the ancient hanbok reflects some similarity with the Scythian clothing, numerous differences between the two types of clothing have also been observed which led associated professor Youngsoo Chang from the Department of Cultural Properties in Gyeongju University in 2020 to suggest that the theory about Scythian clothing being the archetype of the ancient hanbok, a theory accepted as common knowledge in Korean academia, having to be revised. It is also important to note that the Goguryeo tomb murals were primarily painted in two geographical regions: Ji'an ( 集安 ) and Pyongyang . : 15 The former is the second capital of Goguryeo while the latter is the third capital of Goguryeo from the mid-fourth to the mid-seventh centuries. : 15 While the mural paintings found in regions Ji'an typically shows the characteristics of Goguryeo people in terms of their customs and morals; those from the regions of Pyeongyang typically show the cultural influences of the Han dynasty as the Han dynasty had governed this geographical region for approximately 400 years, including Chinese-style clothing. : 15\n\nEarly forms of hanbok can be seen in the art of Goguryeo tomb murals in the same period from the 4th to 6th century CE. Trousers, long jackets and twii (a sash-like belt) were worn by both men and women. Women wore skirts on top of their trousers. These basic structural and features of hanbok remain relatively unchanged to this day, except for the length and the ways the jeogori opening was closed as over the years. The jeogori opening was initially closed at the center front of the clothing, similar to a kaftan or closed to the left, before closing to the right side eventually became mainstream. Since the sixth century CE, the closing of the jeogori at the right became a standard practice. The length of the female jeogori also varied. For example, women's jeogori seen in Goguryeo paintings of the late 5th century CE are depicted shorter in length than the man's jeogori . \n\nIn early Goguryeo, the jeogori jackets were hip-length Kaftan tunics belted at the waist, and the po overcoats were full body-length Kaftan robes also belted at the waist. The pants were roomy, bearing close similarities to the pants found at Xiongnu burial site of Noin Ula . [ citation needed ] Some Goguryeo aristocrats wore roomy pants with tighter bindings at the ankle than others, which may have been status symbols along with length, cloth material, and colour. Women sometimes wore pants or otherwise wore pleated skirts. They sometimes wore pants underneath their skirts. \n\nTwo types of hwa (shoes) were used, one covering only the foot, and the other covering up to the lower knee. [ citation needed ]\n\nDuring this period, the conical hat and its similar variants, sometimes adorned with long bird feathers, were worn as headgear. Bird feather ornaments, and bird and tree motifs of golden crowns, are thought to be symbolic connections to the sky. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe Goguryeo period royal attire was known as ochaebok . The precursor of what is now known as the durumagi was introduced during the Goguryeo period as a long coat worn by Northern Chinese. Originally the durumagi was worn by the upper class of Goguryeo for various ceremonies and rituals. It was later modified and worn by the general population. In Muyong-chong murals of Goguryeo , there are male dancers in short jeogori with long flexible sleeves and female dancers wearing long coats with long flexible sleeves, all performing a dance. This type of long sleeves, similar to the Chinese water-sleeves , was passed down to Goryeo, Joseon, and present day Korean court dances and shamanic rituals. [ citation needed ]\n\nIn the North-South States Period (698–926 CE), Silla and Balhae adopted dallyeong , a circular-collar robe from the Tang dynasty of China. In Silla, the dallyeong was introduced by Muyeol of Silla in the second year of queen Jindeok of Silla . The dallyeong style from China was used as gwanbok , a formal attire for government officials, grooms, and dragon robe , a formal attire for royalty until the end of Joseon. \n\nThe Silla Kingdom unified the Three Kingdoms in 668 CE. The Unified Silla (668-935 CE) was the golden age of Korea. In Unified Silla, various silks, linens, and fashions were imported from Tang China and Persia. In the process, the latest fashion trends of Luoyang which included Chinese dress styles, the second capital of Tang, were also introduced to Korea, where the Korean silhouette became similar to the Western Empire silhouette . King Muyeol of Silla personally travelled to the Tang dynasty to voluntarily request for clothes and belts; it is however difficult to determine which specific form and type of clothing was bestowed although Silla requested the bokdu (幞頭; a form of hempen hood during this period), danryunpo (團領袍; round collar gown), banbi , baedang (䘯襠), and pyo (褾). Based on archaeological findings, it is assumed that the clothing which was brought back during Queen Jindeok rule are danryunpo and bokdu . The bokdu also become part of the official dress code of royal aristocrats, court musicians, servants, and slaves during the reign of Queen Jindeok ; it continued to be used throughout the Goryeo dynasty. In 664 CE, Munmu of Silla decreed that the costume of the queen should resemble the costume of the Tang dynasty ; and thus, women's costume also accepted the costume culture of the Tang dynasty . Women also sought to imitate the clothing of the Tang dynasty through the adoption of shoulder straps attached to their skirts and wore the skirts over the jeogori . The influence of the Tang dynasty during this time was significant and the Tang court dress regulations were adopted in the Silla court. The clothing of the Tang dynasty introduced in Silla made the clothing attire of Silla Court extravagant, and due to the extravagance, King Heundeog enforced clothing prohibition during the year 834 CE. The general public of Silla continued to wear their own traditional clothing. \n\nBalhae (698–926 CE) imported many various kinds of silk and cotton cloth from the Tang and diverse items from Japan including silk products and ramie. In exchange, Balhae would export fur and leather. The clothing culture of Balhae was heterogeneous; it was not only influenced by the Tang dynasty but also had inherited Goguryeo and indigenous Mohe people elements. Early Balhae officials wore clothing appeared to continue the Three Kingdoms period tradition. However, after Mun of Balhae , Balhae started to incorporate elements from the Tang dynasty, which include the putou and round collared gown for its official attire. Male everyday clothing was similar to Gogoryeo clothing in terms of its headgear; i.e. hemp or conical hats with bird feathers; they also wore leather shoes and belts. Women clothing appears to have adopted clothing from Tang dynasty (i.e. upper garment with long sleeves which is partially covered by long skirts and shoes with curled tips to facilitate walking) but also wore the ungyeon (Yunjuan; a silk shawl) which started to appear after the demise of the Tang dynasty. The Ungyeon use is unique to late Balhae period and is distinctive from the shawl which was worn by the women of the Tang dynasty. People from Balhae also wore fish-skin skirts and sea leopard leather tops to keep warm. \n\nThe Chinese style imported in the Northern-South period, however, did not affect hanbok still used by the commoners, [ citation needed ] In the following Goryeo period, use of the Chinese Tang dynasty style of wearing the skirt over the top started to fade, and the wearing of top over skirt was revived in the aristocrat class. The way of wearing the top under the chima (Tang-style influenced fashion) did not disappear in Goryeo and continued to coexist with the indigenous style of wearing of the top over skirt throughout the entire Goryeo dynasty; this Tang-style influenced fashion continued to be worn until the early Joseon dynasty and only disappeared in the middle and late Joseon periods. \n\nIn Goryeo Buddhist paintings , the clothing and headwear of royalty and nobles typically follow the clothing system of the Song dynasty . The Goryeo painting \"Water-Moon Avalokiteshvara\", for example, is a Buddhist painting which was derived from both Chinese and Central Asian pictorial references. On the other hand, the Chinese clothing worn in Yuan dynasty rarely appeared in paintings of Goryeo. The Song dynasty system was later exclusively used by Goryeo Kings and Goryeo government officials after the period when Goryeo was under Mongol rule (1270 –1356). However, even in the Buddhist painting of the late Goryeo, such as the Royal Palace Mandala , the courting ladies are depicted in Tang and Song dynasty-style court dress clothing, which is a different style from the Mongol Yuan court. \n\nHanbok went through significant changes under Mongol rule. After the Goryeo dynasty signed a peace treaty with the Mongol Empire in the 13th century, Mongolian princesses who married into the Korean royal house brought with them Mongolian fashion which began to prevail in both formal and private life. A total of seven women from the Yuan imperial family were married to the kings of Goryeo. The Yuan dynasty princess followed the Mongol lifestyle who was instructed to not abandon the Yuan traditions in regards to clothing and precedents. As a consequence, the clothing of Yuan was worn in the Goryeo court and impacted the clothing worn by the upper-class families who visited the Goryeo court. The Yuan clothing culture which influenced the upper classes and in some extent the general public is called Mongolpung . King Chungryeol, who was political hostage to the Yuan dynasty and pro-Yuan, married the princess of Yuan announcing a royal edict to change into Mongol clothing. After the fall of the Yuan dynasty , only Mongol clothing which were beneficial and suitable to Goryeo culture were maintained while the others disappeared. As a result of the Mongol influence, the chima skirt was shortened, and jeogori was hiked up above the waist and tied at the chest with a long, wide ribbon, the goreum g (an extending ribbon tied on the right side) instead of the twii (i.e. the early sash-like belt) and the sleeves were curved slightly. [ citation needed ]\n\nThe cultural exchange was also bilateral and Goryeo had cultural influence on the Mongols court of the Yuan dynasty (1279–1368); one example is the influence of Goryeo women's hanbok on the attire of aristocrats, queens, and concubines of the Mongol court which occurred in the capital city, Khanbaliq . However, this influence on the Mongol court clothing mainly occurred in the last years of the Yuan dynasty. Throughout the Yuan dynasty, many people from Goryeo were forced to move into the Yuan; most of them were kongnyo (literally translated as \"tribute women\"), eunuchs, and war prisoners. About 2000 women from Goryeo were sent to Yuan as kongnyo against their will. Although women from Goryeo were considered very beautiful and good servants, most of them lived in unfortunate situations, marked by hard labour and sexual abuse. However, this fate was not reserved to all of them; and one Goryeo woman became the last Empress of the Yuan dynasty; this was Empress Gi who was elevated as empress in 1365. Most of the cultural influence that Goryeo exerted on the upper class of the Yuan dynasty occurred when Empress Gi came into power as empress and started to recruit many Goryeo women as court maids. The influence of Goryeo on the Mongol court's clothing during the Yuan dynasty was dubbed as Goryeoyang (\"the Goryeo style\") and was rhapsodized by the Late Yuan dynasty poet, Zhang Xu, in the form of a short banbi (半臂) with square collar (方領). However, so far, the modern interpretation on the appearance of Mongol royal women's clothing influenced by Goryeo is based on authors' suggestions. According to Hyunhee Park: \"Like the Mongolian style, it is possible that this Koryŏ style [ Koryŏ yang ] continued to influence some Chinese in the Ming period after the Ming dynasty replaced the Yuan dynasty, a topic to investigate further.\" \n\nNeo-Confucianism as the ruling ideology in Joseon was established by the early Joseon dynasty kings; this led to the dictation of clothing style worn by all social classes in Joseon (including the dress of the royals, the court members, the aristocrats and commoners) in all types of occasions, which included wedding and funerals. Social values such as the integrity in men and chastity in women were also reflected in how people would dress. After the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–98) or Imjin War , economic hardship on the peninsula may have influenced the closer-fitting styles that use less fabric. \n\nEarly Joseon continued the women's fashion for baggy, loose clothing, such as those seen on the mural from the tomb of Bak Ik (1332–1398); the murals from the tomb of Bak Ik are valuable resources in Korean archaeology and art history for study of life and customs in early Joseon. The women of the upper classes, the monarchy and the court wore hanbok which was inspired by the Ming dynasty clothing while simultaneously maintaining a distinctive Korean-style look; in turn, the women of the lower class generally imitated the upper-class women clothing. During the Joseon dynasty, the chima or skirt adopted fuller volume, while the jeogori or blouse took more tightened and shortened form, features quite distinct from the hanbok of previous centuries, when chima was rather slim and jeogori baggy and long, reaching well below waist level.\n\nIn the 15th century, neo-confucianism was very rooted in the social life in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries which lead to the strict regulation of clothing (including fabric use, colours of fabric, motifs, and ornaments) based on status. Neo-confucianism also influence women's wearing of full-pleated chima, longer jeogori, and multiple layers clothing in order to never reveal skin. In the 15th century, women started wearing of full-pleated chima which completely hide the body lines and longer-length jeogori. The 15th century CE chima-jeogori style was undoubtedly a clothing style introduced from China consisting of longer jeogori and pleated chima. \n\nHowever, by the 16th century, the jeogori had shortened to the waist and appears to have become closer fitting, although not to the extremes of the bell-shaped silhouette of the 18th and 19th centuries. In the 16th century, women's jeogori was long, wide, and covered the waist. The length of women's jeogori gradually shortened: it was approximately 65 cm in the 16th century, 55 cm in the 17th century, 45 cm in the 18th century, and 28 cm in the 19th century, with some as short as 14.5 cm. A heoritti ( 허리띠 ) or jorinmal ( 졸잇말 ) was worn to cover the breasts. The trend of wearing a short jeogori with a heoritti was started by the gisaeng and soon spread to women of the upper class. Among women of the common and lowborn classes, a practice emerged in which they revealed their breasts by removing a cloth to make breastfeeding more convenient. As there was an excessive preference for boys in the Joseon dynasty, the deliberate exposure of breast eventually became a cultural practice and an indicator of women's pride and status symbol in having given birth to a son and thus she would \"proudly bare her breasts to feed her child, deliberately provoking the envy of other women\". During the 17th and 18th centuries the fullness of the skirt was concentrated around the hips, thus forming a silhouette similar to Western bustles. In the 18th century, the jeogori became very short to the point that the waistband of the chima was visible; this style was first seen on female entertainers at the Joseon court. The jeogori continued to shorten until it reached modern times jeogori -length; i.e. just covering the breasts. The fullness of the skirt reached its extreme around 1800. During the 19th century fullness of the skirt was achieved around the knees and ankles thus giving chima a triangular or an A-shaped silhouette, which is still the preferred style to this day. Many undergarments such as darisokgot, soksokgot, dansokgot , and gojengi were worn underneath to achieve desired forms.\n\nAt the end of the 19th century, as mentioned above, Heungseon Daewongun introduced magoja , a Manchu-style jacket, which is often worn over jeogori to this day.\n\nA clothes reformation movement aimed at lengthening jeogori experienced wide success in the early 20th century and has continued to influence the shaping of modern hanbok. Modern jeogori are longer, although still halfway between the waistline and the breasts. Heoritti are sometimes exposed for aesthetic reasons.\n\nMen's hanbok saw little change compared to women's hanbok. The form and design of jeogori and baji hardly changed.\n\nIn contrast, men's lengthy outwear, the equivalent of the modern overcoat, underwent a dramatic change. Before the late 19th century, yangban men almost always wore jungchimak when traveling. Jungchimak had very lengthy sleeves, and its lower part had split on both sides and occasionally on the back so as to create a fluttering effect in motion. To some this was fashionable, but to others, namely stoic scholars, it was nothing but pure vanity. Daewon-gun successfully banned jungchimak as a part of his clothes reformation program and jungchimak eventually disappeared.\n\nDurumagi , which was previously worn underneath jungchimak and was basically a house dress, replaced jungchimak as the formal outwear for yangban men. Durumagi differs from its predecessor in that it has tighter sleeves and does not have splits on either side or back. It is also slightly shorter in length. Men's hanbok has remained relatively the same since the adoption of durumagi . In 1884, the Gapsin Dress Reform took place. Under the 1884's decree of King Gojong , only narrow-sleeves traditional overcoats were permitted; as such, all Koreans, regardless of their social class, age and their gender started to wear the durumagi or chaksuui or ju-ui (周衣). \n\nHats were an essential part of formal dress and the development of official hats became even more pronounced during this era due to the emphasis on Confucian values. The gat was considered an essential aspect in a man's life; however, to replace the gat in a more informal setting, such as their residences, and to feel more comfortable, Joseon-era aristocrats also adopted a lot of hats which were introduced from China, such as the banggwan, sabanggwan, dongpagwan, waryonggwan, jeongjagwan. The popularity of those Chinese hats may have partially been due to the promulgation of Confucianism and because they were used by literary figures and scholars in China. In 1895, King Gojong decreed adult Korean men to cut their hair short and western-style clothing were allowed and adopted. \n\nThe upper classes wore hanbok of closely woven ramie cloth or other high-grade lightweight materials in warm weather and of plain and patterned silks the rest of the year. Commoners were restricted by law as well as resources to cotton at best.\n\nThe upper classes wore a variety of colors, though bright colors were generally worn by children and girls and subdued colors by middle-aged men and women. Commoners were restricted by law to everyday clothes of white, but for special occasions they wore dull shades of pale pink, light green, gray, and charcoal. The color of the chima showed the wearer's social position and statement. For example, a navy color indicated that a woman had a son(s). Only the royal family could wear clothing with geumbak -printed patterns (gold leaf) on the bottom of the chima.\n\nBoth men and women wore their hair in a long braid until they were married, at which time the hair was knotted. A man's hair was knotted in a topknot called sangtu ( 상투 ) on the top of the head, and the woman's hair was rolled into a ball-shaped form or komeori and was set just above the nape of the neck.\n\nA long pin, or binyeo ( 비녀 ), was worn in women's knotted hair as both a fastener and a decoration. The material and length of the binyeo varied according to the wearer's class and status. Women also wore a ribbon known as a daenggi ( 댕기 ) to tie and decorate braided hair. Women wore a jokduri on their wedding day and wore an ayam for protection from the cold. Men wore a gat , which varied according to class and status.\n\nBefore the 19th century, women of high social backgrounds and kisaeng wore wigs ( gache ). Like their Western counterparts, Koreans considered bigger and heavier wigs to be more desirable and aesthetic. Such was the women's frenzy for the gache that in 1788 King Jeongjo banned by royal decree the use of gache , as they were deemed contrary to the Korean Confucian values of reserve and restraint. \n\nOwing to the influence of Neo-Confucianism, it was compulsory for women throughout the entire society to wear headdresses ( nae-oe-seugae ) to avoid exposing their faces when going outside. Those headdresses may include suegaechima (a headdress that looked like a chima but was narrower and shorter in style, worn by the upper-class women and later by all classes of people in late Joseon), the jang-ot , and the neoul (which was only permitted for court ladies and noblewomen). \n\nModern hanbok is the direct descendant of hanbok patterned after those worn by aristocratic women or by the people who were at least from the middle-class in the Joseon period, specifically the late 19th century. Hanbok had gone through various changes and fashion fads during the five hundred years under the reigns of Joseon kings and eventually evolved to what is now considered typical hanbok.\n\nBeginning in the late 19th century, hanbok was largely replaced by new Western imports like the Western suit and dress. Today, formal and casual wear are usually based on Western styles. However, hanbok is still worn for traditional occasions, and is reserved for celebrations like weddings, the Lunar New Year, annual ancestral rites, or the birth of a child.\n\nHanbok was featured in international haute couture ; on the catwalk, in 2015 when Karl Lagerfeld dressed Korean models for Chanel , and during Paris Fashion Week in photography by Phil Oh . It has also been worn by international celebrities, such as Britney Spears and Jessica Alba , and athletes, such as tennis player Venus Williams and football player Hines Ward . \n\nHanbok is also popular among Asian-American celebrities, such as Lisa Ling and Miss Asia 2014, Eriko Lee Katayama . It has also made appearances on the red carpet, and was worn by Sandra Oh at the SAG Awards , and by Sandra Oh's mother who made fashion history in 2018 for wearing a hanbok to the Emmy Awards . \n\nThe South Korean government has supported the resurgence of interest in hanbok by sponsoring fashion designers. Domestically, hanbok has become trendy in street fashion and music videos. It has been worn by prominent K-pop artists like Blackpink and BTS , notably in their music videos for \" How You Like That \" and \"Idol.\" [ unreliable source? ]\n\nIn Seoul, tourist's wearing of hanbok makes their visit to the Five Grand Palaces (Changdeokgung, Changgyeonggung, Deoksugung, Gyeongbokgung and Gyeonghuigung) free of charge.\n\nIn Busan, the APEC South Korea 2005 provided hanbok for delegates of the 21 member economies of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation.\n\nHanbok is also worn in present-day North Korea where it is known as Joseon-ot ( 조선옷 ; 朝鮮옷 ; Joseon-ot ). The Joseon-ot thus highlights the identity of the Korean ethnic and has been more actively promoted under the rule of Kim Jong Un . The Joseon-ot is currently typically worn during special occasions, e.g. weddings, : 49 and when North Koreans celebrate the 60th, 70th, and 80th birthdays of their parents. It is also mandated that women wear Joseon-ot when attending National events, such as Kim Jong Il 's birthday (16 February), International women's day (8 March), Kim Il Sung's birthday (15 April), Foundation Day (9 September). : 78 White colored hanbok is often used as the color white has been the traditionally favored by the Korean people as the symbolism of pure spirit. \n\nThe chima-jeogori remains the clothing of women, including female university students who are required to wear it as part of their university school uniforms. The uniform of female university students has been a black-and-white chima-jeogori since the early to mid 2000s. The chima can often be found at a length of about 30 cm from the ground for practical purposes in order to facilitate movements and to ensure that women could wear it during their daily workday with ease and comfort; this decrease in skirt length also gives a sense of modern style. : 75\n\nThe Joseon-ot patterns also have special meanings which are given by the North Koreans. Generally, young people in North Korea like floral prints and bright colours, while the older generations favour simple styles of clothing and solid colours. : 376 The chima-jeogori in North Korea is sometimes characterized by its use of floral patterns which are often added to the sleeves of the jeogori and to the chima . Azaleas , in particular, are favoured in Yongbyon due to their association with the emotional poem Azaleas (《 진달래꽃 》) by Kim So-wol . Men occasionally wear joseon-ot . \n\nHowever, joseon-ot are typically more expensive than ordinary clothing, and renting is available for people who cannot afford to purchase one; some are available for purchase at US$20 while the joseon-ot made in China with South Korean designs and fabrics are more expensive and can cost approximately US$3000. The mid-2010s also saw the increased popularity of children dressing in joseon-ot by their parents. \n\nThe custom of Korean costume was inscribed on UNESCO's Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage by North Korea in 2024. \n\nThe 1950s and 1960s also saw women from the upper-class wear Joseon-ot made out of rayon while a black-and-white chima-jeogori consisting of a black long-length chima and white jeogori were used in the 1950s and 1960s where it was generally worn by women; this style can, however, be traced to a typical clothing style used in the Joseon period. This combination is still representative of the ideal woman and remains the official outfit for women in North Korea to this day. : 77 In the 1980s, the Joseon-ot became the official attire of women when attending ceremonies while western-style clothing became the everyday, ordinary clothing. \n\nAfter the mid-1990s due to extreme economic contractions, women could purchase their Joseon-ot in private markers and were allowed to choose their desired colours and designs. \n\nIn 2001, Lee Young-Hee , a South Korean hanbok designer visited Pyongyang to hold a fashion show at the Pyeongyang Youth Center on 4 and 6 June; : 262 and since the 2002, North Korea have held their own fashion show in Pyongyang every spring. Since 2001, there have been an increase of shops specialized in the customization of Joseon-ot in Pyongyang which was reported by the KBCS. : 261 This increase was due to a project implemented by the public service bureau of the Pyongyang People's Committee to increase Joseon-ot tailoring shops. : 262 These shops are typically found in large cities, such as Pyeongyang and Gaesong but are rarely found in small cities and villages. : 262\n\nIn China , the hanbok is referred as chaoxianfu ( Chinese : 朝鮮服 ; 조선옷 ; 朝鮮옷 ; Joseon-ot ) and is recognized as being the traditional ethnic clothing of chaoxianzu ( simplified Chinese : 朝鲜族 ; traditional Chinese : 朝鮮族 ; pinyin : cháoxiǎnzú ; lit. ' Joseon (Korean) ethnic group') in China. Chaoxianzu is an official term and is recognized as one of the official 55 ethnic minorities in China . People of the chaoxianzu ethnic group are not recent immigrants to China, but have a long history having lived in China for generations. : 240 They share the same ethnic identity as the ethnic Korean people in both North and South Korea, but are counted as Chinese citizens by nationality under the Constitution of China. Their traditions are not entirely the same due to their unique historical experiences, geographical location and mixed identities. The term chaoxianzu literally corresponds to Chosŏnjok ( 조선족 ; 朝鮮族 ), a non-official derogatory term in South Korea, to refer to Hangukgye Junggugin ( lit. ' Korean-Chinese ' ), which is the actual legal term in South Korea. In the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture , where most chaoxianzu reside, the chaoxianfu was mostly worn on special occasions in the past; however, by 2019, they had regained popularity and have become fashionable. \n\nSince the Chinese economic reform of China, there have been more exchanges with both Koreas leading to both the development and changes in chaoxianzu-style Chosŏn-ot in China; some of designs of the chaoxianzu-style Chosŏn-ot have been influenced and inspired by both South Korean and North Korean hanbok designs. : 246\n\nChaoxianzu people originally preferred to wear white as it represented cleanliness, simplicity, and purity; however, since the 20th century, the colours started to become brighter and more vivid as woven fabrics, such as polyester and nylon sateen, started to be introduced. The \"reform and opening up\" of China also allowed for more exchanges with both Koreas, which lead to the both development and changes in the chaoxianfu of China. Following the chaoxianzu tradition, the chaoxianfu has an A-line in silhouette to give it the appearance of a mountain as per the tradition, women are the host of the family, and thus, women holding the household need to be stable; the chaoxianfu also covers the entire body. The chaoxianzu have developed their own style of hanbok due to the isolation for about 50 years from both North and South Korea. : 240, 246 As a result, the styles of hanbok in South Korea, North Korea, and China, worn by the Korean people from these three countries have developed separately from each other. For example, Yemi Hanbok by Songok Ryu, an ethnic chaoxianzu from the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture , is unique in both style and business model as it can operate in both South Korea and North Korea. : 240, 246 In terms of chaoxianfu design, Yemi Hanbok designs are based on Chinese-style designs. : 246 Over the years, the women's chaoxianfu also changed in length for the jeogori , git , and goreum and changed in width for the git , dong-jeong , sleeves, and goreum . The git and barae have evolved from straight to curve patterns. The wrinkle arrangement, length, and silhouette of the chima have also evolved; some of the skirts were sometimes decorated with gold embroidery or gold leaf at the bottom hem. The colours used were also very varied; for example, feminine colours such as pink, yellow, and deep red could be used. The 1990s saw the use of gold leaf, floral prints, embroidery on the women's chaoxianfu ; the use of gradient colours also emerged. For men, their jeogori , baji , and sleeves were made longer; their baji also became wider. The durumagi continues to be worn, and the baeja and magoja are worn frequently in present-days. \n\nOn 7 June 2008, the chaoxianfu were approved by the State Council of China to be included in the second layer of national intangible cultural heritage. In 2011, the chaoxianfu was officially designated as being part of the intangible cultural heritage of China by the Chinese government; while the announcement was welcomed by the chaoxianzu people in China as a proud indicator of their equal membership in a multi-ethnic and multicultural country such as China, it received negative criticism from South Koreans who perceived it as a \"scandalous appropriation of the distinctive national culture of Koreans\". : 239 In 2022, a girl from the chaoxianzu ethnic group wore a chaoxianfu on the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics opening ceremony leading to an uproar from South Koreans who accused China of cultural appropriation . \n\nEspecially from the Goryeo dynasty, the hanbok started to determine differences in social status (from people with the highest social status (kings), to those of the lowest social status (slaves) ) and gender through the many types, components, colours, : 132 and characteristics. Although the modern hanbok does not express a person's status or social position, hanbok was an important element of distinguishment especially in the Goryeo and Joseon dynasties. For example, farmers and commoners were not allowed to wear colour garments in their daily lives, excluding some categories of people, such as the shamans, gisaeng , and children, who were allowed to wear colourful clothing despite their social status. : 132 Occasions when all people were allowed to wear colourful clothing were for special ceremonial occasions (e.g. wedding, birthday, holidays). : 132\n\nHwarot or hwal-ot was the full dress for a princess and the daughter of a king by a concubine , formal dress for the upper class, and bridal wear for ordinary women during the Goryeo and Joseon dynasties. Popular embroidered patterns on hwarot were lotuses , phoenixes , butterflies, and the ten traditional symbols of longevity: the sun; mountains; water; clouds; rocks/stone; pine trees; the mushroom of immortality; turtles; white cranes , and deer. Each pattern represented a different role within society, for example: a dragon represented an emperor while a phoenix represented a queen; floral patterns represented a princess and a king's daughter by a concubine, and clouds and cranes represented high ranking court officials. All these patterns throughout Korean history had meanings of longevity, good luck, wealth and honor. Hwarot also had blue, red, and yellow colored stripes in each sleeve ; a woman usually wore a scarlet-colored skirt and yellow or green-colored Jeogori , a traditional Korean jacket. Hwarot was worn over the Jeogori and skirt. A woman also wore her hair in a bun, with an ornamental hairpin and a ceremonial coronet . A long ribbon was attached to the ornamental hairpin, the hairpin is known as Yongjam ( 용잠 ). In more recent times, people wear hwarot on their wedding day, and so the Korean tradition survives in the present day. \n\nWonsam was a ceremonial overcoat for a married woman in the Joseon dynasty. The Wonsam was also adopted from China and is believed to have been one of the costumes from the Tang dynasty which was bestowed in the Unified Three Kingdoms period. It was mostly worn by royalty, high-ranking court ladies, and noblewomen and the colors and patterns represented the various elements of the Korean class system. The empress wore yellow; the queen wore red; the crown princess wore a purple-red color; : 132 meanwhile a princess, a king's daughter by a concubine , and a woman of a noble family or lower wore green. All the upper social ranks usually had two colored stripes in each sleeve: yellow-colored Wonsam usually had red and blue colored stripes, red-colored Wonsam had blue and yellow stripes, and green-colored Wonsam had red and yellow stripes. Lower-class women wore many accompanying colored stripes and ribbons, but all women usually completed their outfit with onhye or danghye , traditional Korean shoes. \n\nDangui or tangwi were minor ceremonial robes for the queen, a princess, or wife of a high ranking government official while it was worn during major ceremonies among the noble class in the Joseon dynasty. The materials used to make dangui varied depending on the season, so upper-class women wore thick dangui in winter while they wore thinner layers in summer. The dangui came in many colors, but yellow and/or green were most common. However the emperor wore purple dangui , and the queen wore red. In the Joseon dynasty, ordinary women wore dangui as part of their wedding dress. \n\nMyeonbok were the king's religious and formal ceremonial robes while jeokui were the queen's equivalent during the Goryeo and Joseon dynasties. Myeonbok was composed of Myeonryu-Gwan ( 면류관 ) and Gujang-bok ( 구장복 ). Myonryu-Gwan had beads, which hung loose; these would prevent the king from seeing wickedness. There were also wads of cotton in the left and right sides of Myeonryu-Gwan, and these were supposed to make the king oblivious to the influence of corrupt officials. Gujang-bok was black, and it bore nine symbols out of the Twelve ornaments , which all represented the king: \n\nJeokui or tseogwi ( Korean : 적의 ) was arranged through the use of different colors as a status symbol within the royal family. The empress wore purple-red colored Jeokui, the queen wore pink, and the crown princess wore deep blue. \"Jeok\" means pheasant, and so Jeokui often had depictions of pheasants embroidered onto it. \n\nCheolick (Cheollik; 철릭 ) was a Korean adaptation of the Mongol tunic Terlig . The first recorded reference to the Terlig in Korea dates to the 15th century during the Joseon period. They were described as presents from the Ming dynasty or as military uniforms. A Joseon publication of a Goryeo period song Jeongseokga in the Akjang Gasa used the term Telik , referring to an officer's uniform. However, in surviving Goryeo literary sources, there is no reference to a term for clothing similar to Terlig in sound. Due to Mongol influence, some Korean vocabulary including official titles, falconry, and military terms originated in the Mongol language. \n\nThe Cheolick, unlike other forms of Korean clothing, is an amalgamation of a blouse with a kilt into a single item of clothing. The flexibility of the clothing allowed easy horsemanship and archery. During the Joseon dynasty, they continued to be worn by the king, and military officials for such activities. It was usually worn as a military uniform, but by the end of the Joseon dynasty, it had begun to be worn in more casual situations. A unique characteristic allowed the detachment of the Cheolick's sleeves which could be used as a bandage if the wearer was injured in combat. \n\nAyngsam was the formal clothing for students during the national government exam and governmental ceremonies. It was typically yellow, but for the student who scored the highest in the exam, they were rewarded with the ability to wear green Aengsam. If the highest-scoring student was young, the king awarded him with red-colored Aengsam. It was similar to the namsam but with a different colour. \n\nBinyeo was a traditional ornamental hairpin, and it had a different-shaped tip again depending on social status. As a result, it was possible to determine the social status of the person by looking at the binyeo . Women in the royal family had dragon or phoenix-shaped binyeo while ordinary women had trees or Japanese apricot flowers. Binyeo was a proof of marriage and considered a woman's expression of chastity and decency. \n\nDaenggi is a traditional Korean cloth ribbon used to tie and decorate braided hair.\n\nNorigae was a typical traditional accessory for women; it was worn by all women regardless of social ranks. However, the social rank of the wearer determined the size and material of the norigae . \n\nDanghye or tanghye ( 당혜 ) were shoes for married women in the Joseon dynasty. Danghye were decorated with trees bearing grapes, pomegranates , chrysanthemums , or peonies : these were symbols of longevity. \n\nDanghye for a woman in the royal family were known as kunghye ( 궁혜 ), and they were usually patterned with flowers. \n\nDanghye for commoner women were known as onhye ( 온혜 ). \n\nIn Hanbok, various cotton fabrics are used as materials, and with the entry of Western civilization, the range of fabrics such as mixed fabrics has expanded. The use of materials also varies slightly depending on the jeogori and pants, and there is a big difference in the season. In the case of jeogori, there are more than 10 types of general materials such as silk, jade, and general wool, and they use ramie or hemp in summer, and silk or Gapsa, Hangra, and Guksa cloth in spring and autumn. The material used evenly throughout the four seasons was sesame, and silk, both ends, and silk were often used in the durumagi for adult men. In the case of silk, which is one of the most widely used materials due to differences in lining and outer material, most of the silk jeogori was lined with silk, and if it was not possible, only the inside of the collar, the tip, and the sap were lined with silk. If this situation did not work out like this, the fine-grained cotton was used. In fact, more than half of the materials identified in the jeogori study were silk, followed by cotton and hemp. In some cases, silk and cotton were lined with a mixture. When the jeogori was torn or broken, most of them were sewn with the same fabric, and a large piece was added to the elbow and sewn. Just as in the fact that silk was used a lot in jeogori, silk, cotton, and literary arts were evenly used in various clothes, ranging from red ginseng, skirt, beoseon, and pants.",
  "A state religion (also called official religion ) is a religion or creed officially endorsed by a sovereign state . A state with an official religion (also known as confessional state ), while not a secular state , is not necessarily a theocracy . State religions are official or government-sanctioned establishments of a religion, where public spending on the maintenance of church property and clergy is unrestricted, but the state does not need to be under the legislative control of the clergy as it would be in a theocracy.\n\nOfficial religions have been known throughout human history in almost all types of cultures, reaching into the Ancient Near East and prehistory . The relation of religious cult and the state was discussed by the ancient Latin scholar Marcus Terentius Varro , under the term of theologia civilis ( lit. ' civic theology ' ). The first state-sponsored Christian denomination was the Armenian Apostolic Church , established in 301 CE. In Christianity , as the term church is typically applied to a place of worship for Christians or organizations incorporating such ones, the term state church is associated with Christianity as sanctioned by the government, historically the state church of the Roman Empire in the last centuries of the Empire's existence, and is sometimes used to denote a specific modern national branch of Christianity. Closely related to state churches are ecclesiae , which are similar but carry a more minor connotation.\n\nIn the Middle East , the majority of states with a predominantly Muslim population have Islam as their official religion, though the degree of religious restrictions on citizens' everyday lives varies by country. Rulers of Saudi Arabia use religious power, while Iran 's secular presidents are supposed to follow the decisions of religious authorities since the 1979 Islamic Revolution . Turkey , which also has Muslim-majority population, became a secular country after Atatürk's Reforms , although unlike the Russian Revolution of the same time period, it did not result in the adoption of state atheism .\n\nThe degree to which an official national religion is imposed upon citizens by the state in contemporary society varies considerably; from high as in Saudi Arabia and Iran , to none at all as in Greenland , Denmark , England , Iceland , and Greece (in Europe, the state religion might be called in English, the established church ).\n\nThe degree and nature of state backing for denomination or creed designated as a state religion can vary. It can range from mere endorsement (with or without financial support) with freedom for other faiths to practice , to prohibiting any competing religious body from operating and to persecuting the followers of other sects. In Europe, competition between Catholic and Protestant denominations for state sponsorship in the 16th century evolved the principle Cuius regio, eius religio (states follow the religion of the ruler) embodied in the text of the treaty that marked the Peace of Augsburg in 1555. In England , Henry VIII broke with Rome in 1534, being declared the Supreme Head of the Church of England , [ a ] the official religion of England continued to be \"Catholicism without the Pope\" until after his death in 1547. \n\nIn some cases, an administrative region may sponsor and fund a set of religious denominations; such is the case in Alsace-Moselle in France under its local law , following the pre-1905 French concordatory legal system and patterns in Germany . \n\nA state church (or \"established church\") is a state religion established by a state for use exclusively by that state. In the case of a state church , the state has absolute control over the church, but in the case of a state religion , the church is ruled by an exterior body; for example, in the case of Catholicism, the Vatican has control over the church.\n\nDisestablishment is the process of repealing a church's status as an organ of the state. In a state where an established church is in place, opposition to such a move may be described as antidisestablishmentarianism .\n\nGovernments where Buddhism , either a specific form of it, or Buddhism as a whole, has been established as an official religion:\n\nIn some countries, Buddhism is not recognized as a state religion, but holds special status:\n\nThe following states recognize some form of Christianity as their state or official religion or recognize a special status for it (by denomination):\n\nJurisdictions where Catholicism has been established as a state or official religion:\n\nJurisdictions that give various degrees of recognition in their constitutions to Roman Catholicism without establishing it as the State religion:\n\nThe jurisdictions below give various degrees of recognition in their constitutions to Eastern Orthodoxy , but without establishing it as the state religion:\n\nThe following states recognize some form of Protestantism as their state or official religion:\n\nThe Anglican Church of England is the established church in England as well as all three of the Crown Dependencies :\n\nJurisdictions where a Lutheran church has been fully or partially established as a state recognized religion include the Nordic States .\n\nJurisdictions that give various degrees of recognition in their constitutions to Lutheranism without establishing it as the state religion:\n\nMany Muslim-majority countries have constitutionally established Islam, or a specific form of it, as a state religion. Proselytism (converting people away from Islam) is often illegal in such states. \n\nIn some countries, Islam is not recognized as a state religion, but holds special status:\n\nIn some countries, there is a political ideology sponsored by the government that may be called political religion . \n\nIslam in Russia is recognized under the law and by Russian political leaders as one of Russia's traditional religions, Islam is a part of Russian historical heritage , and is subsidized by the Russian government. The position of Islam as a major Russian religion, alongside Orthodox Christianity , dates from the time of Catherine the Great , who sponsored Islamic clerics and scholarship through the Orenburg Assembly . \n\nIn addition, the Treaty of Lausanne explicitly guarantees the security and protection of both Greek and Armenian Orthodox Christian minorities and the Turkish-Jews . Their religious institutions are recognized officially by the state. \n\nCatholic Christianity, as opposed to Arianism and other ideologies deemed heretical , was declared to be the state religion of the Roman Empire on 27 February 380 by the decree De fide catolica of Emperor Theodosius I . \n\nIn China, the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE) advocated Confucianism as the de facto state religion, establishing tests based on Confucian texts as an entrance requirement into government service—although, in fact, the \"Confucianism\" advocated by the Han emperors may be more properly termed a sort of Confucian Legalism or \"State Confucianism\". This sort of Confucianism continued to be regarded by the emperors, with a few notable exceptions, as a form of state religion from this time until the collapse of the Chinese monarchy in 1912. Note, however, there is a debate over whether Confucianism (including Neo-Confucianism ) is a religion or purely a philosophical system. \n\nDuring the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty of China (1271–1368 CE), Tibetan Buddhism was established as the de facto state religion by the Kublai Khan , the founder of the Yuan dynasty. The top-level department and government agency known as the Bureau of Buddhist and Tibetan Affairs (Xuanzheng Yuan) was set up in Khanbaliq (modern Beijing ) to supervise Buddhist monks throughout the empire. Since Kublai Khan only esteemed the Sakya sect of Tibetan Buddhism, other religions became less important. Before the end of the Yuan dynasty, 14 leaders of the Sakya sect had held the post of Imperial Preceptor (Dishi), thereby enjoying special power. \n\nThe Mongol rulers Ghazan of Ilkhanate and Uzbeg of Golden Horde converted to Islam in 1295 CE because of the Muslim Mongol emir Nawruz and in 1313 CE because of Sufi Bukharan sayyid and sheikh Ibn Abdul Hamid respectively. Their official favoring of Islam as the state religion coincided with a marked attempt to bring the regime closer to the non-Mongol majority of the regions they ruled. In Ilkhanate, Christian and Jewish subjects lost their equal status with Muslims and again had to pay the poll tax; Buddhists had the starker choice of conversion or expulsion. \n\nThe list of former confessional states only includes states that abolished their state religion themselves, not states with a state religion that were conquered, fell apart or otherwise disappeared.",
  "The headline is the text indicating the content or nature of the article below it, typically by providing a form of brief summary of its contents.\n\nThe large type front page headline did not come into use until the late 19th century when increased competition between newspapers led to the use of attention-getting headlines.\n\nIt is sometimes termed a news hed , a deliberate misspelling that dates from production flow during hot type days, to notify the composing room that a written note from an editor concerned a headline and should not be set in type . \n\nHeadlines in English often use a set of grammatical rules known as headlinese , designed to meet stringent space requirements by, for example, leaving out forms of the verb \"to be\" and choosing short verbs like \"eye\" over longer synonyms like \"consider\".\n\nA headline's purpose is to quickly and briefly draw attention to the story. It is generally written by a copy editor , but may also be written by the writer, the page layout designer, or other editors. The most important story on the front page above the fold may have a larger headline if the story is unusually important. The New York Times 's 21 July 1969 front page stated, for example, that \" MEN WALK ON MOON \", with the four words in gigantic size spread from the left to right edges of the page. \n\nIn the United States, headline contests are sponsored by the American Copy Editors Society , the National Federation of Press Women , and many state press associations; some contests consider created content already published, others are for works written with winning in mind. \n\nResearch in 1980 classified newspaper headlines into four broad categories: questions , commands, statements, and explanations. Advertisers and marketers classify advertising headlines slightly differently into questions, commands, benefits, news/information, and provocation. \n\nA study indicates there has been a substantial increase of sentiment negativity and decrease of emotional neutrality in headlines across written popular U.S.-based news media since 2000. \n\nAnother study concluded that those who have gained the most experience with reading newspapers \"spend most of their reading time scanning the headlines—rather than reading [all or most of] the stories\". \n\nHeadlines can bias readers toward a specific interpretation and readers struggle to update their memory in order to correct initial misconceptions in the cases of misleading or inappropriate headlines. \n\nOne approach investigated as a potential countermeasure to online misinformation is \"attaching warnings to headlines of news stories that have been disputed by third-party fact-checkers\", albeit its potential problems include e.g. that false headlines that fail to get tagged are considered validated by readers. \n\nThe use of \"slam\" in headlines has attracted criticism on the grounds that the word is overused and contributes to media sensationalism . The violent imagery of words like \"slam\", \"blast\", \"rip\", and \"bash\" has drawn comparison to professional wrestling , where the primary aim is to titillate audiences with a conflict-laden and largely predetermined narrative, rather than provide authentic coverage of spontaneous events. \n\n\"Crash blossoms\" is a term used to describe headlines that have unintended ambiguous meanings, such as The Times headline \"Hospitals named after sandwiches kill five\". The word 'named' is typically used in headlines to mean \"blamed/held accountable/named [in a lawsuit]\", but in this example it seems to say that the hospitals' names were related to sandwiches. The headline was subsequently changed in the electronic version of the article. The term was coined in August 2009 on the Testy Copy Editors web forum after the Japan Times published an article entitled \"Violinist Linked to JAL Crash Blossoms\" (since retitled to \"Violinist shirks off her tragic image\"). \n\nHeadlinese is an abbreviated form of news writing style used in newspaper headlines. Because space is limited, headlines are written in a compressed telegraphic style , using special syntactic conventions, including:\n\nSome periodicals have their own distinctive headline styles, such as Variety and its entertainment-jargon headlines, most famously \" Sticks Nix Hick Pix \".\n\nTo save space and attract attention, headlines often use extremely short words, many of which are not otherwise in common use, in unusual or idiosyncratic ways: \n\nSome famous headlines in periodicals include:\n\nThe New Republic editor Michael Kinsley began a contest to find the most boring newspaper headline. According to him, no entry surpassed the one that had inspired him to create the contest: \"WORTHWHILE CANADIAN INITIATIVE\", over a column by The New York Times ' Flora Lewis . In 2003, New York Magazine published a list of eleven \"greatest tabloid headlines\". ",
  "Fox Nation is an American subscription video on demand service. Announced on February 20, 2018, and launching on November 27 of that year, it is a companion to Fox News Channel carrying programming of interest to its audience, including original opinion-based talk shows and documentary-style programs featuring Fox News personalities (which, as with its parent network, are produced from a conservative perspective), outdoor recreation -related programs, and other acquired programming. It also offers next-day streaming of Fox News primetime programs.\n\nThe \"Fox Nation\" name originates from a website Fox News had launched in 2009, which featured blogs by conservative and liberal commentators. The new service was announced for a debut in late 2018, and was described as catering to \"superfans\" of the conservative-leaning Fox News—which the network deemed to be \"the most loyal audience in cable, if not all of television\". \n\nSome of the original programming on the service has included Nuff Said with Tyrus , What Made America Great with Brian Kilmeade , and Sincerely, Kat —hosted by The Greg Gutfeld Show panelist Kat Timpf . Diamond and Silk had a program on Fox Nation, but were dropped by Fox News in March 2020 amid their promotion of COVID-19 misinformation . \n\nIn 2020, the service began to acquire outdoor recreation -themed programming, including acquiring streaming rights to the former A&E reality show Duck Dynasty , and premiering the original hunting series Fox Nation Outdoors. The service has picked up stand-up comedy specials involving conservative-leaning comedians, such as Roseanne Barr ( Cancel This! ) and Rob Schneider ( Woke Up in America ). \n\nOn March 29, 2021, the service began to carry Tucker Carlson Today —a spin-off of Tucker Carlson Tonight . Tucker Carlson also produced original documentaries for the service under the banner Tucker Carlson Originals . \n\nIn May 2021, Fox Nation began to stream Fox News primetime programs (such as Tucker Carlson Tonight and Hannity ) on-demand the day after their original airing, branded as \"Fox News Primetime All the Time\". It also added a video simulcast of Dan Bongino 's syndicated radio show, as part of an agreement for him to host a new Saturday night program on Fox News. In September 2021, Fox Nation greenlit a revival of former Fox series Cops for a 33rd season, after having previously been dropped by Paramount Network , following the police murder of George Floyd . \n\nIn March 2022, Fox Nation announced Duck Family Treasure , a new reality series starring Jase and Jep Robertson of Duck Dynasty fame. In April 2022, Fox Nation announced Historic Battles for America , a historical miniseries narrated by Kelsey Grammer . It also acquired Piers Morgan Uncensored from the British channel TalkTV , which is a sister to Fox News via sister company News Corp and News UK . In September 2022 Fox Nation premiered its first direct-to-streaming film, The Shell Collector , adapted from the novel by Nancy Naigle . \n\nIn February 2023, it acquired The History of the World in Six Glasses , a Dan Aykroyd -fronted comedy documentary on the history of beverages, and released its first stand-up comedy special with Roseanne Barr , Cancel This! In June 2023, Fox Nation acquired Crime Cam 24/7 , a caught-on-camera series hosted by Sean \"Sticks\" Larkin of Live PD fame. In July 2023, Fox Nation announced The Fall of the House of Mardaugh , a Martha MacCallum -hosted docuseries on the Alex Mardaugh murders that would also include an interview with his son Buster Mardaugh. In September 2023, it released The Killer Interview with Piers Morgan , a documentary series in which Morgan interviews convicted killers. \n\nThe following month, Fox Nation announced Jesus Crown of Thorns , a docu-drama from Jane Root 's Nutopia . During the Easter season in 2024, it also exhibited the drama The Chosen and film The Passion of the Christ . \n\nThe Saints , a docudrama series narrated and presented by Martin Scorsese , debuted on Fox Nation in November 2024. \n\nIn February 2024, Fox Nation announced that the third season of 100 Days to Indy , a docuseries focusing on the Indianapolis 500 automobile race, would air on their platform, moving from The CW . The show additionally expanded its focus to the entire IndyCar Series season and gained the subtitle Road to the IndyCar Championship . ",
  "7–10, see text.\n\nThe European robin ( Erithacus rubecula ), known simply as the robin or robin redbreast in the British Isles, is a small insectivorous passerine bird that belongs to the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae. It is found across Europe, east to Western Siberia and south to North Africa; it is sedentary in the west and south of its range, and migratory in the north and east of its range where winters are harsher.\n\nIt is 12.5–14.0 cm (4.9–5.5 in) in length; the male and female are identical in plumage, with an orange-toned red breast and face lined with grey, brown upper-parts and a whitish belly. Juveniles are distinct, freckled brown all over and without the red breast; first-winter immatures are like the adults, except for more obvious yellow-brown tips to the wing covert feathers (inconspicuous or absent in adults).\n\nThe distinctive orange breast of both sexes contributed to the European robin's original name of \"redbreast\", orange as a colour name being unknown in English until the 16th century, by which time the fruit of the same name had been introduced. The Dutch roodborstje , French rouge-gorge , Swedish rödhake , German Rotkehlchen , Italian pettirosso , Spanish petirrojo and Portuguese pisco-de-peito-ruivo all refer to the distinctively coloured front. \n\nIn the 15th century, when it became popular to give human names to familiar species, the bird came to be known as robin redbreast , which was eventually shortened to robin . As a given name , Robin is originally a smaller form of the name Robert . The term robin is also applied to some birds in other families with red or orange breasts. These include the American robin ( Turdus migratorius , a thrush ) and the Australasian robins of the family Petroicidae , the relationships of which are unclear.\n\nOther older English names for the bird include ruddock and robinet . In American literature of the late 19th century, this robin was frequently called the English robin . \n\nThe European robin was described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the 10th edition of his Systema Naturae under the binomial name Motacilla rubecula . Its specific epithet rubecula is a diminutive derived from the Latin ruber , meaning 'red'. The genus Erithacus was described by French naturalist Georges Cuvier in 1800, giving the bird its current binomial name E. rubecula . The genus name Erithacus is from Ancient Greek and refers to an unknown bird, now usually identified as robin. \n\nThe genus Erithacus was formerly classified as a member of the thrush family (Turdidae) but is now known to belong to the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae . The genus formerly included the Japanese robin and the Ryukyu robin , but these east Asian species were shown in molecular phylogenetic studies to be more similar to a group of other Asian species than to the European robin; in a reorganisation of the genera, the Japanese and the Ryukyu robins were moved to the resurrected genus Larvivora leaving the European robin as the sole member of Erithacus . A 2010 phylogenetic analysis placed Erithacus in the subfamily Erithacinae, which otherwise contained only African species, but its exact position with respect to the other genera was not resolved. More detailed analysis has shown it to be the sole European member of an otherwise entirely tropical African subfamily Cossyphinae , in which it is in a basal position. \n\nIn their large continental Eurasian range, robins vary somewhat, but do not form discrete populations that might be considered subspecies . Robin subspecies are mainly distinguished by forming resident populations on islands and in mountainous areas. The robin found in the British Isles and much of western Europe, Erithacus rubecula melophilus , occurs as a vagrant in adjacent regions. E. r. witherbyi from northwest Africa, Corsica, and Sardinia closely resembles melophilus but has shorter wings. The northeasternmost birds, large and fairly washed-out in colour, are E. r. tataricus . In the southeast of its range, E. r. valens of the Crimean Peninsula , E. r. caucasicus of the Caucasus and northern Transcaucasia , and E. r. hyrcanus southeastwards into Iran are generally accepted as significantly distinct. \n\nOn Madeira and the Azores , the local population has been described as E. r. microrhynchos , and although not distinct in morphology , its isolation seems to suggest the subspecies is valid (but see below). \n\nThe most distinct birds are those of Gran Canaria ( E. r. marionae ) and Tenerife ( E. r. superbus ), which may be considered two distinct species or at least two different subspecies. They are readily distinguished by a white eye-ring, an intensely coloured breast, a grey line that separates the orange-red from the brown colouration, and the belly is entirely white. \n\nCytochrome b sequence data and vocalisations indicate that the Gran Canaria/Tenerife robins are indeed very distinct and probably derived from colonisation by mainland birds some 2 million years ago. [ a ]\n\nChristian Dietzen, Hans-Hinrich Witt and Michael Wink published in 2003 in Avian Science a study called \"The phylogeographic differentiation of the European robin Erithacus rubecula on the Canary Islands revealed by mitochondrial DNA sequence data and morphometrics: evidence for a new robin taxon on Gran Canaria?\". In it they concluded that Gran Canaria's robin diverged genetically from their European relatives as far back as 2.3 million years, while the Tenerife ones took another half a million years to make this leap, 1.8 million years ago. The most likely reason would be a different colonisation of the Canaries by this bird, which arrived at the oldest island first (Gran Canaria) and subsequently passed to the neighbouring island (Tenerife). \n\nA thorough comparison between marionae and superbus is pending to confirm that the first one is effectively a different subspecies. Initial results suggest that birds from Gran Canaria have wings about 10% shorter than those on Tenerife. The west Canary Islands' populations are younger ( Middle Pleistocene ) and only beginning to diverge genetically. Robins from the western Canary Islands : El Hierro, La Palma and La Gomera ( E. r. microrhynchus ) are similar to the European type subspecies ( E. r. rubecula ). \n\nFinally, the robins which can be found in Fuerteventura are the European ones, which is not surprising as the species does not breed either in this island or in the nearby Lanzarote ; they are wintering birds or just passing through during their long migration between Africa and Europe. \n\nThe larger American robin ( Turdus migratorius ) is a much larger bird named from its similar colouration to the European robin, but the two birds are not closely related, with the American robin instead belonging to the same genus as the common blackbird ( T. merula ), a species which occupies much of the same range as the European robin. The similarity between the European and American robins lies largely in the orange chest patch found in both species. This American species was incorrectly shown \"feathering its nest\" in London in the film Mary Poppins , but it only occurs in the UK as a very rare vagrant. \n\nSome South and Central American Turdus thrushes are also called robins, such as the rufous-collared thrush . The Australian \"robin redbreast\", more correctly the scarlet robin ( Petroica multicolor ), is more closely related to crows and jays than it is to the European robin. It belongs to the family Petroicidae , whose members are commonly called \"Australasian robins\". The red-billed leiothrix ( Leiothrix lutea ) is sometimes named the \"Pekin robin\" by aviculturalists . Another group of Old World flycatchers, this time from Africa and Asia, is the genus Copsychus ; its members are known as magpie-robins , one of which, the Oriental magpie robin ( C. saularis ), is the national bird of Bangladesh. \n\nThe adult European robin is 12.5–14.0 cm (4.9–5.5 in) long and weighs 16–22 g (0.56–0.78 oz), with a wingspan of 20–22 cm (8–8.5 in). The male and female bear similar plumage: an orange breast and face (more strongly coloured in the otherwise similar British subspecies E. r. melophilus ), lined by a bluish grey on the sides of the neck and chest. The upperparts are brownish, or olive-tinged in British birds, and the belly whitish, while the legs and feet are brown. The bill and eyes are black. Juveniles are a spotted brown and white in colouration, with patches of orange gradually appearing. \n\nThe robin occurs in Eurasia east to Western Siberia, south to Algeria and on the Atlantic islands as far west as the Central Group of the Azores and Madeira. It is a vagrant in Iceland. In the southeast, it reaches Iran the Caucasus range. Irish and British robins are largely resident but a small minority, usually female, migrate to southern Europe during winter, a few as far as Spain. Scandinavian and Russian robins migrate to Britain and western Europe to escape the harsher winters. These migrants can be recognised by the greyer tone of the upper parts of their bodies and duller orange breast. The continental European robins that migrate during winter prefer spruce woods in northern Europe, contrasting with its preference for parks and gardens in Great Britain. \n\nIn southern Iberia, habitat segregation of resident and migrant robins occurs, with resident robins remaining in the same woodlands where they bred. \n\nAttempts to introduce the European robin into Australia and New Zealand in the latter part of the 19th century were unsuccessful. Birds were released around Melbourne, Auckland, Christchurch, Wellington and Dunedin by various local acclimatisation societies , with none becoming established. There was a similar outcome in North America, as birds failed to become established after being released in Long Island , New York in 1852, Oregon in 1889–1892, and the Saanich Peninsula in British Columbia in 1908–1910. \n\nThe robin is diurnal , although it has been reported to be active hunting insects on moonlit nights or near artificial light at night. Well known to British and Irish gardeners, it is relatively unafraid of people and drawn to human activities involving the digging of soil, in order to look out for earthworms and other food freshly turned up. The British and Irish considered robins to be a gardener's friend and would never harm them, due also to the traditional association of the red colouring of their breasts with the blood of Christ . In continental Europe, on the other hand, robins were hunted and killed as were most other small birds, and are therefore more wary. Robins also approach large wild animals, such as wild boar, which disturb the ground, to look for any food that might be brought to the surface.\n\nIn autumn and winter, robins will supplement their usual diet of terrestrial invertebrates, such as spiders, worms and insects, with berries, fruit and seeds. They will also eat seed mixtures and suet placed on bird-tables, as well as left-overs. The robin is even known to feed on small vertebrates (including fish and lizards) and carrion. \n\nMale robins are very territorial and will fiercely attack other males and competitors that stray into their territories. They have been observed attacking other small birds without apparent provocation. There are recorded instances of robins attacking their own reflection. Territorial disputes sometimes lead to fatalities, accounting for up to 10% of adult robin deaths in some areas. \n\nBecause of high mortality in the first year of life, a robin has an average life expectancy of 1.1 years; however, once past its first year, life expectancy increases. One robin has been recorded as reaching 19 years of age. A spell of very low temperatures in winter can, however, result in higher mortality rates. The species is parasitised by the moorhen flea ( Dasypsyllus gallinulae ) and the acanthocephalan Apororhynchus silesiacus . \n\nRobins may choose a wide variety of sites for building a nest. In fact, anything which can offer some shelter, like a depression or hole, may be considered. As well as the usual crevices, or sheltered banks, other objects include pieces of machinery, barbecues, bicycle handlebars, bristles on upturned brooms, discarded kettles, watering cans, flower pots and hats. Robins will also nest in manmade nest boxes , favouring a design with an open front placed in a sheltered position up to 2 metres (6 ft 7 in) from the ground. Nests are generally composed of moss, leaves and grass, with fine grass, hair and feathers for lining. \n\nTwo or three clutches of five or six eggs are laid throughout the breeding season, which commences in March in Britain and Ireland. The eggs are a cream, buff or white speckled or blotched with reddish-brown colour, often more heavily so at the larger end. When juvenile birds fly from the nests, their colouration is entirely mottled brown. After two to three months out of the nest, the juvenile bird grows some orange feathers under its chin, and over a similar period this patch gradually extends to complete the adult appearance of an entirely red-orange breast. \n\nThe robin produces a fluting, warbling song ⓘ during the breeding season. Both the male and female sing throughout the year, including during the winter, when they hold separate territories. During the winter, the robin's song is more plaintive than the summer version. The female robin moves a short distance from the summer nesting territory to a nearby area that is more suitable for winter feeding. The male robin keeps the same territory throughout the year. During the breeding season, male robins usually initiate their morning song an hour before civil sunrise, and usually terminate their daily singing around thirty minutes after sunset. Nocturnal singing can also occur, especially in urban areas that are artificially lit during the night. Some urban robins opt to sing at night to avoid daytime anthropogenic noise. \n\nThe avian magnetic compass of the robin has been extensively researched and uses vision-based magnetoreception , in which the robin's ability to sense the magnetic field of the Earth for navigation is affected by the light entering the bird's eye. The physical mechanism of the robin's magnetic sense involves quantum entanglement of electron spins in cryptochrome in the bird's eyes. \n\nThe European robin has an extensive range and a population numbering in the hundreds of millions. The species does not approach the vulnerable thresholds under the population trend criterion (>30 per cent decline over ten years or three generations); the population appears to be increasing. The International Union for Conservation of Nature evaluates it as least concern . \n\nThe robin features prominently in British folklore and that of northwestern France, but much less so in other parts of Europe, though in the nineteenth century Jacob Grimm reported a tradition from German-speaking Europe that if someone disturbed a robin's nest their house would be struck by lightning. : 682–83 Robins feature in the traditional children's tale Babes in the Wood ; the birds cover the dead bodies of the children. \n\nThe robin has become strongly associated with Christmas, taking a starring role on many Christmas cards since the mid-19th century. The robin has appeared on many Christmas postage stamps . An old British folk tale seeks to explain the robin's distinctive breast. Legend has it that when Jesus was dying on the cross, the robin, then simply brown in colour, flew to his side and sang into his ear in order to comfort him in his pain. The blood from his wounds stained the robin's breast, and thereafter all robins carry the mark of Christ's blood upon them. [ b ]\n\nAn alternative legend has it that its breast was scorched fetching water for souls in Purgatory. The association with Christmas more probably arises from the fact that postmen in Victorian Britain wore red jackets and were nicknamed \"Robins\"; the robin featured on the Christmas card is an emblem of the postman delivering the card. \n\nIn the 1960s, in a vote publicised by The Times , the robin was adopted as the unofficial national bird of the United Kingdom. In 2015, the robin was again voted Britain's national bird in a poll organised by birdwatcher David Lindo, taking 34% of the final vote. \n\nSeveral English and Welsh sports organisations are nicknamed \"the Robins\". The nickname is typically used for teams whose home colours predominantly use red. These include the professional football clubs Bristol City , Crewe Alexandra , Swindon Town , Cheltenham Town and, traditionally, Wrexham A.F.C. , as well as the English rugby league team the Hull Kingston Rovers (whose home colours are white with a red band). As of 2019, Bristol City, Swindon Town and Cheltenham Town also incorporate a robin image in their current badge designs. [ citation needed ] A small bird is an unusual choice, although it is thought to symbolise agility in darting around the field. ",
  "A frivolous party or a joke party is a political party which has been created for the purposes of entertainment or political satire . Such a party may or may not have a serious point behind its activities. Many countries have had a Pirate Party which could be considered frivolous. This is a list of frivolous political parties.\n\nSome more serious political parties, such as the Rent Is Too Damn High Party , may use the same tactics and humorous approaches to politics as their more frivolous counterparts but aim to address legitimate sociopolitical issues, something that some frivolous parties do not do.",
  "Baião ( Portuguese pronunciation: [baˈjɐ̃w] ) is a Northeastern Brazilian music genre and dance style based on a syncopated duple meter rhythm , based around the pulse of the zabumba , a flat, double-headed bass drum played with a mallet in one hand and a stick in the other, each striking the opposite head of the drum for alternating high and low notes, frequently accompanied by an accordion and a triangle pattern. The baião rhythm is integral to the genres of forró , repente and coco (or embolada). It is mostly associated with the state of Pernambuco . Baião was popularized via radio in the 1940s, reaching peak popularity in the 1950s.\n\nAmerindian elements include the use of flutes, later replaced by the accordion , and wooden Shaker ; African-influenced baião might be accompanied by atabaque drums and include overlapping call and response singing; and European influences include the use of the triangle , Western harmony, and dance music such as the quadrille , polka , mazurka , and schottische , heavy influences to forró , a dance-oriented variant. Repente music uses the baião rhythm in the context of acoustic guitar -centric vocal music, featuring the singing of improvised or pre-written lyrics in a specific meter and sometimes accompanied by the baião-style accordion and rhythm section. Some instances were accompanied by European-style orchestras .\n\nAccording to Guerra Peixe , baião mostly borrows harmonically from European music tradition and uses the minor mode and the major scale ( Ionian mode), Mixolydian , Lydian and Dorian modes , and the first, second, fourth and fifth scale degrees in chord progressions . The supertonic frequently appears with an augmented fourth . It is notated in duple meter (2/4 time) and most frequently uses eighth notes , quarter notes , half notes , and dotted whole notes .\n\nBaião originated sometime before the 20th century, reportedly among Amerindian peoples native to the Northeast . [ citation needed ] It later gradually incorporated elements of many other indigenous traditions, and mestizo , African , and European music , as well as evolving a reputation as dance music. It is said by historian and folklorist Câmara Cascudo to already have been a popular dance since at least the late 19th century, and to have been propelled into the mainstream by the 1946 success of Luiz Gonzaga , which replaced a bolero fad in Brazil. \n\nLike early sertanejo and caipira music, baião and its subgenres are associated with rural living. [ citation needed ] Baião's reputation as rural music liked by lower-class people caused its avoidance by much of the urban upper class for much of the 20th century. Although previously not well known outside its native region, a conscious decision by 1960s MPB and Tropicália musicians to embrace and reference traditional and folk music saw a resurgence of baião rhythms. A key record in this revival was the 1967 album by Quarteto Novo .\n\nDespite the relatively small area of its greater popularity, a great variety of music is associated with baião, reflecting its status as traditional music and traditional dance in the Northeast. Some key artists are Luiz Gonzaga and Selma do Côco , both hailing from Pernambuco, Humberto Teixeira , Sivuca , Carmélia Alves , Dominguinhos and repentistas such as Perdal Lins and Verde Lins . \n\nBaião is featured in the 1951 Italian film Anna and is known both by its original name El Negro Zumbón ( The Jolly Black Man ) and as Anna's Baión . ",
  "The Australian National University ( ANU ) is a public research university and member of the Group of Eight , located in Canberra , the capital of Australia . Its main campus in Acton encompasses seven teaching and research colleges, in addition to several national academies and institutes. \n\nEstablished in 1946, ANU is the only university to have been created by the Parliament of Australia . [ a ] It traces its origins to Canberra University College , which was established in 1929 and was integrated into ANU in 1960. ANU enrols 13,329 undergraduate and 11,021 postgraduate students and employs 4,517 staff. The university's endowment stood at A$1.8 billion as of 2018. \n\nANU counts six Nobel laureates and 49 Rhodes scholars among its faculty and alumni . The university has educated the incumbent Governor-General of Australia , two former prime ministers , and more than a dozen current heads of government departments of Australia . The latest releases of ANU's scholarly publications are held through ANU Press online. \n\nCalls for the establishment of a national university in Australia began as early as 1900. After the location of the nation's capital, Canberra , was determined in 1908, land was set aside for the ANU at the foot of Black Mountain in the city designs by Walter Burley Griffin . Establishment of the university was disrupted by World War II but resumed with the creation of the Department of Post-War Reconstruction in 1942, ultimately leading to the passage of the Australian National University Act 1946 by the Chifley government on 1 August 1946. \n\nA group of eminent Australian scholars returned from overseas to join the university, including Sir Howard Florey (co-developer of medicinal penicillin ), Sir Mark Oliphant (a nuclear physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project ), and Sir Keith Hancock (the Chichele Professor of Economic History at Oxford ). The group also included a New Zealander, Sir Raymond Firth (a professor of anthropology at LSE ), who had earlier worked in Australia for some years. Economist Sir Douglas Copland was appointed as ANU's first Vice-Chancellor and former Prime Minister Stanley Bruce served as the first Chancellor. ANU was originally organised into four centres—the Research Schools of Physical Sciences, Social Sciences and Pacific Studies and the John Curtin School of Medical Research . \n\nThe first residents' hall, University House , was opened in 1954 for faculty members and postgraduate students. Mount Stromlo Observatory , established by the federal government in 1924, became part of ANU in 1957. The first locations of the ANU Library , the Menzies and Chifley buildings, opened in 1963. The Australian Forestry School, located in Canberra since 1927, was amalgamated by ANU in 1965. \n\nCanberra University College (CUC) was the first institution of higher education in the national capital, having been established in 1929 and enrolling its first undergraduate pupils in 1930. Its founding was led by Sir Robert Garran , one of the drafters of the Australian Constitution and the first Solicitor-General of Australia . CUC was affiliated with the University of Melbourne and its degrees were granted by that university. Academic leaders at CUC included historian Manning Clark , political scientist Finlay Crisp , poet A. D. Hope and economist Heinz Arndt . \n\nIn 1960, CUC was integrated into ANU as the School of General Studies, initially with faculties in arts, economics, law and science. Faculties in Oriental studies and engineering were introduced later. Bruce Hall, the first residential college for undergraduates, opened in 1961. \n\nThe Canberra School of Music and the Canberra School of Art combined in 1988 to form the Canberra Institute of the Arts , and amalgamated with the university as the ANU Institute of the Arts in 1992. \n\nANU established its Medical School in 2002, after obtaining federal government approval in 2000. \n\nOn 18 January 2003, the Canberra bushfires largely destroyed the Mount Stromlo Observatory . ANU astronomers now conduct research from the Siding Spring Observatory , which contains 10 telescopes including the Anglo-Australian Telescope . \n\nIn February 2013, financial entrepreneur and ANU graduate Graham Tuckwell made the largest university donation in Australian history by giving $50 million to fund an undergraduate scholarship program at ANU. \n\nANU is well known for its history of student activism and, in recent years, its fossil fuel divestment campaign , which is one of the longest-running and most successful in the country. The decision of the ANU Council to divest from two fossil fuel companies in 2014 was criticised by ministers in the Abbott government , but defended by Vice Chancellor Ian Young, who noted:\n\nOn divestment, it is clear we were in the right and played a truly national and international leadership role. [...] [W]e seem to have played a major role in a movement which now seems unstoppable. \n\nAs of 2014 [update] ANU holds investments in major fossil fuel companies. \n\nA survey conducted by the Australian Human Rights Commission in 2017 found that the ANU had the second-highest incidence of sexual assault and sexual harassment. 3.5 per cent of respondents from the ANU reported being sexually assaulted in 2016. Vice Chancellor Brian Schmidt apologised to victims of sexual assault and harassment. \n\nThe ANU had funding and staff cuts in the School of Music in 2011–15 and in the School of Culture, History and Language in 2016. However, there is a range of global (governmental) endowments available for Arts and Social Sciences, designated only for ANU. Some courses are now delivered online. \n\nANU has exchange agreements in place for its students with many foreign universities, most notably in the Asia-Pacific region, including the National University of Singapore , the University of Tokyo , the University of Hong Kong , Peking University , Tsinghua University and Seoul National University . In other regions, notable universities include Université Paris Sciences et Lettres the George Washington University , the University of California , the University of Texas , the University of Toronto in North America and Imperial College London , King's College London , Sciences Po , ETH Zürich , Bocconi University , the University of Copenhagen and Trinity College Dublin in Europe. \n\nIn 2017, Chinese hackers infiltrated the computers of Australian National University, potentially compromising national security research conducted at the university. \n\nThe main campus of ANU extends across the Canberra suburb of Acton , which consists of 358 acres (1.45 km 2 ) of mostly parkland with university buildings landscaped within. ANU is roughly bisected by Sullivans Creek , part of the Murray–Darling basin , and is bordered by the native bushland of Black Mountain , Lake Burley Griffin , the suburb of Turner and the Canberra central business district . Many university sites are of historical significance dating from the establishment of the national capital, with over 40 buildings recognised by the Commonwealth Heritage List and several others on local lists. \n\nWith over 10,000 trees on its campus, ANU won an International Sustainable Campus Network Award in 2009 and was ranked the 2nd greenest university campus in Australia in 2011. \n\nFour of Australia's five learned societies are based at ANU—the Australian Academy of Science , the Australian Academy of the Humanities , the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia and the Australian Academy of Law. The Australian National Centre for the Public Awareness of Science and the National Film and Sound Archive are also located at ANU, while the National Museum of Australia and CSIRO are situated next to the campus.\n\nANU occupies additional locations including Mount Stromlo Observatory on the outskirts of Canberra, Siding Spring Observatory near Coonabarabran , a campus at Kioloa on the South Coast of New South Wales and a research unit in Darwin . \n\nThe Drill Hall Gallery is housed a drill hall dating from the 1940s, for use in training soldiers for the Second World War , and as base for 3rd Battalion, Werriwa Regiment . The interior was remodelled to create an art gallery in 1984, and in 2004 the building was heritage-listed . Temporary exhibitions of the national collection were held in the hall while the National Gallery of Australia was being built. ANU took over the hall in 1992 to exhibit its own collection of artworks, and also as a venue for temporary exhibitions. \n\nThere are four separate exhibition spaces, which provide the venues not only for exhibitions developed by or in collaboration with the university, but also to accompany major conferences and public events. The venue hosts both national and international exhibitions. Sidney Nolan 's panorama, Riverbend , which comprises nine panels, ís on permanent display at the Drill Hall Gallery. \n\nANU is governed by a 15-member Council, whose members include the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor . Gareth Evans , a former Foreign Minister of Australia , was ANU Chancellor from 2010 to December 2019 and Brian Schmidt , an astrophysicist and Nobel Laureate, served as Vice-Chancellor from 1 January 2016 to 1 January 2024. Evans was succeeded as Chancellor by a fellow former Foreign Minister, Julie Bishop , in January 2020. Schmidt was succeeded as Vice-Chancellor by cultural anthropologist and Distinguished Professor Genevieve Bell in January 2024. \n\nANU was reorganised in 2006 to create seven Colleges, each of which leads both teaching and research. Additional restructuring occurred in 2017, resulting in changes to the names and schools within the Colleges. \n\nThe ANU College of Arts and Social Sciences is divided into the Research School of Social Sciences (RSSS) and Research School of Humanities and the Arts (RSHA). Within RSSS there are schools and centres dedicated to History , Philosophy , Sociology , Politics & International Relations , Demography , Arab and Islamic Studies, and European Studies , as well as the Australian National Centre for Latin and American Studies, Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research, and the ANU Centre for Social Research and Methods. \n\nRSHA contains schools of Archaeology and Anthropology ; Art & Design ; and Literature , Languages and Linguistics , the latter of which include departments focusing on Linguistics & Applied Linguistics; English, Screen, Drama & Gender Studies; Languages & Cultures, and Classical Studies. RSHA also houses the ANU School of Music . In 2017, ANU ranked 6th in the world for politics, 8th in the world for Social Policy and Administration and 11th in the world for development studies. \n\nThe college is also home to the Australian Studies Institute. \n\nThe college's School of Philosophy houses the ANU Centre for Consciousness, ANU Centre for Philosophy of the Sciences, and ANU Centre for Moral, Social and Political Theory, an organization whose purpose is to \"become a world-leading forum for exposition and analysis of the evolution, structure, and implications of our moral, social and political life.\" Its president is Nicholas Southwood and key people include Seth Lazar , Geoff Brennan , Bob Goodin , Frank Jackson, Philip Pettit and Michael Smith. [ when? ] [ citation needed ]\n\nThe ANU College of Asia and the Pacific is a specialist centre of Asian and Pacific studies and languages, among the largest collections of experts in these fields of any university in the English-speaking world. The college is home to four academic schools: the ANU Crawford School of Public Policy , a research intensive public policy school; the School of Culture, History and Language, for studies of Asia-Pacific people and languages; the Coral Bell School of Asia Pacific Affairs , covering politics and international affairs of Asia and the Pacific; and the School of Regulation and Global Governance (RegNet, formerly the Regulatory Institutions Network), study of regulation and governance. \n\nThe college also houses the Australian Centre on China in the World, the Strategic and Defence Studies Centre , and the Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific , Australia. It has dedicated regional institutes for China, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Mongolia, Myanmar, the Pacific, Southeast Asia and South Asia. The college hosts a series annual and biannual updates, on various regions in the Asia-Pacific. The Crawford School of Public Policy houses the Asia Pacific Arndt-Cohen Department of Economics, the Asia Pacific Network for Environmental Governance, the Australia-Japan Research Centre, The Centre for Applied Macroeconomic Analysis, the Centre for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, the East Asian Bureau of Economic Research , the Tax and Transfer Policy Institute, the ANU National Security College, the East Asia Forum publication and a number of other centres. The Crawford School of Public Policy also hosts offices and programs for the Australia and New Zealand School of Government . Many high performing Year in Asia program students gain the opportunity to travel to an Asian country of their choosing to study for one year specializing in one Asian language. \n\nThe college also has affiliation with Indiana University 's Pan Asia Institute. \n\nThe ANU College of Business and Economics comprises four schools, which carry research and teaching in economics , finance , accounting , actuarial studies , statistics , marketing and management : \n\nDedicated research centres within these schools include the Social Policy Evaluation, Analysis and Research Centre; the Australian National Centre for Audit and Assurance Research; the ANU Centre for Economic History; the National Centre for Information Systems Research; and the ANU Centre for Economic Policy Research. The college is professionally accredited with the Institute of Chartered Accountants Australia , CPA Australia , the Australian Computer Society , the Actuaries Institute Australia, the Institute of Public Accountants , the Association of International Accountants , the Chartered Financial Analyst Institute and the Statistical Society of Australia Inc. It also has membership of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). \n\nThe ANU College of Systems and Society brings together critical capabilities in understanding the modern interfaces between systems, technology, processes, the physical world, and the social world. The College comprises six academic units: the Australian National Centre for the Public Awareness of Science, Fenner School of Environment & Society, Mathematical Sciences Institute, School of Computing, School of Cybernetics, and School of Engineering. ANU is home to the National Computational Infrastructure National Facility and was a co-founder of NICTA , the chief information and communications technology research centre in Australia.\n\nResearch areas of expertise in the College include: Computing Foundations, Computational Science, Intelligent Systems, Data Science and Analytics, Software Innovation Institute, Cybernetics Education, Cybernetics Futures, Cybernetics Projects, Aerospace Engineering, Energy Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Information and Signals Processing, Mechatronics, Biodiversity and Conservation, Climate and Energy, Food soil water and agriculture, Forests and Fire, Indigenous people and the environment, Integrative methods and application, Urban systems and sustainability, Algebra and Topology, Analysis and Geometry, Applied and Nonlinear Analysis, Bioinformation Science, Computational Mathematics, Fusion plasma theory and modelling, Mathematical Physics, Stochastic analysis and risk modelling, Theoretical astrophysics, Public engagement and informal science, Public Policy and Science Advice, Responsible innovation and emerging technologies, Science media and culture, Theories and frameworks in science communication, and Topics in science communication. \n\nThe ANU College of Law, Governance and Policy comprises the ANU Law School and ANU School of Legal Practice. The college covers legal research and teaching, with centres dedicated to commercial law , international law , public law and environmental law . In addition to numerous research programs, the college offers the professional LL.B. and J.D. degrees. It is the 7th oldest of Australia's 36 law schools and was ranked 2nd among Australian and 12th among world law schools by the 2018 QS Rankings . Students are given the chance to spend three weeks in Geneva concerning the institutional practice of International Law. \n\nThe ANU College of Science and Medicine comprises the Research Schools of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Biology, Chemistry, Earth Sciences, and Physics . Under the direction of Mark Oliphant , nuclear physics was one of the university's most notable early research priorities, leading to the construction of a 500 megajoule homopolar generator and a 7.7 megaelectronvolts cyclotron in the 1950s. These devices were to be used as part of a 10.6 gigaelectronvolt synchrotron particle accelerator that was never completed, however they remained in use for other research purposes. ANU has been home to eight particle accelerators over the years and operates the 14UD and LINAS accelerators. Brian Schmidt (astrophysicist at Mount Stromlo Observatory ) received the 2011 Nobel Prize for Physics for his work on the accelerating expansion of the universe.\n\nThe ANU College of Science & Medicine encompasses the John Curtin School of Medical Research (JCSMR), ANU Medical School , National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, and Research School of Psychology. JCSMR was established in 1948 as a result of the vision of Nobel laureate Howard Florey . Three further Nobel Prizes have been won as a result of research at JCSMR—in 1963 by John Eccles and in 1996 by Peter Doherty and Rolf M. Zinkernagel .\n\nAt the end of 2018, ANU recorded an endowment of A$1.8 billion. \n\nANU is a member of the Group of Eight , Association of Pacific Rim Universities , the International Alliance of Research Universities , UNESCO Chairs , U7 Alliance, Winter Institute. and Global Scholars Program. \n\nANU participates in the US Financial Direct Loan program. The RG Menzies Scholarship to Harvard University is awarded annually to at least one talented Australian who has gained admission to a Harvard graduate school. ANU and University of Melbourne are the only two Australian partner universities of Yale University 's Fox Fellowship program. ANU has exchange partnership with Yale University , Brown University , MIT and Oxford University , and ANU has a research partnership with Harvard University . \n\nThe library of ANU originated in 1948 with the appointment of the first librarian, Arthur McDonald. The library holds over 2.5 million physical volumes distributed across six branches—the Chifley, Menzies, Hancock, Art & Music, and Law Libraries and the external Print Repository. Chifley and Hancock library are both accessible for ANU staff and students 24 hours a day. \n\nFor international students starting in 2025, tuition fees range from A$32,020 to A$95,360 per academic year for award programs lasting at least one year. Domestic students [ b ] may be offered a federally-subsidised Commonwealth Supported Place (CSP) which substantially decreases the student contribution amount billed to the student. The maximum student contribution amount limits that can be applied to CSP students are dependent on the field of study. \n\nSince 2021, Commonwealth Supported Places have also been limited to 7 years of equivalent full-time study load (EFTSL), calculated in the form of Student Learning Entitlement (SLE). Students may accrue additional SLE under some circumstances (e.g. starting a separate one-year honours program) or every 10 years. Domestic students are also able to access the HECS-HELP student loans scheme offered by the federal government. These are indexed to the Consumer or Wage Price Index , whichever is lower, and repayments are voluntary unless the recipient passes an income threshold. \n\nThe university also offers several scholarships , which come in the form of bursaries or tuition fee remission. \n\nIn the 2024 Aggregate Ranking of Top Universities , which measures aggregate performance across the QS, THE and ARWU rankings, the university attained a position of #57 (6th nationally). \n\nIn the Australian Financial Review Best Universities Ranking 2024, the university was ranked #2 amongst Australian universities. \n\nIn the 2025 Quacquarelli Symonds World University Rankings (published 2024), the university attained a position of #30 (4th nationally). \n\nIn the Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2025 (published 2024), the university attained a tied position of #73 (4th nationally). \n\nIn the 2024 Academic Ranking of World Universities , the university attained a position of #101–150 (6th nationally). \n\nIn the 2024–2025 U.S. News & World Report Best Global Universities , the university attained a position of #85 (6th nationally). \n\nIn the CWTS Leiden Ranking 2024, [ c ] the university attained a position of #238 (10th nationally). \n\nThe Australian Government's QILT [ d ] conducts national surveys documenting the student life cycle from enrolment through to employment. These surveys place more emphasis on criteria such as student experience, graduate outcomes and employer satisfaction than perceived reputation, research output and citation counts. \n\nIn the 2023 Employer Satisfaction Survey, graduates of the university had an overall employer satisfaction rate of 84.2%. \n\nIn the 2023 Graduate Outcomes Survey, graduates of the university had a full-time employment rate of 80.7% for undergraduates and 88.5% for postgraduates. The initial full-time salary was A$72,000 for undergraduates and A$96,400 for postgraduates. \n\nIn the 2023 Student Experience Survey, undergraduates at the university rated the quality of their entire educational experience at 79.4% meanwhile postgraduates rated their overall education experience at 72.5%. \n\nAustralian National University Students' Association (ANUSA) is the students' union of the Australian National University and acts as a representative body for the undergraduate, postgraduate and research students. The Australian National University Union is another student association that manages catering, retail outlets and other amenities on behalf of all students. \n\nWoroni is a student publication at Australian National University. It was first published on 23 May 1947 under the title Student Notes: Canberra University College Students Association . On 14 February 1950, the name was changed to Woroni, which is derived from from an Indigenous Australian word meaning \"mouthpiece\". Woroni is published bi-monthly in full colour magazine format, and features local news and opinion. \n\nThe magazine was originally published by the school's student association. An independent student organization called ANU Student Media was incorporated in October 2010, and has operated Woroni ever since. In 2012, an online radio station called Woroni Radio was launched, and a video production arm called Woroni TV was started in 2017. \n\nThis newspaper has been digitised as part of the Australian Newspapers Digitisation Program of the National Library of Australia . As of January 2015, issues dating from 1950 to 2007 are available via Trove . Digital versions of works published since 2011 are uploaded and available in colour on electronic publishing platform issuu . \n\nANU Observer is another of the Australian National University's student news publications. Founded in 2017, ANU Observer is an online news site that covers breaking campus news, student life, student politics, arts and culture, sports, university policy and more. ANU Observer is an ANU student association, meaning all students are members by default (and can attend and vote at General Meetings.) Observer also produces a weekly podcast called Our Experts Have Observed , which can be accessed via Spotify or Apple Podcasts.\n\nEleven on-campus residential halls are affiliated with ANU— Bruce Hall , Burgmann College, Burton & Garran Hall, Fenner Hall, John XXIII College, Ursula Hall, Wamburun Hall, Wright Hall, Yukeembruk Village, Graduate House and Toad Hall . Together these residence accommodate for undergraduate and postgraduate students. Four UniLodge residences are also available to ANU students, situated just off campus—Davey Lodge, Kinloch Lodge, Warrumbul Lodge and Lena Karmel Lodge. In 2010, the non-residential Griffin Hall was established for students living off-campus. Another off-campus student accommodation was launched by UniGardens Pty, University Gardens located in Belconnen .\n\nIn 2014, 2019 and 2020 there were major protests organised by student leaders across all of the ANU's halls of residence against steep rent hikes, neglect of pastoral care support, and repeated failures to address issues relating to sexual assault and sexual harassment. Though supported by a majority of students living on residence, the ANU's response to past protests has been mixed, with many recommendations and requests for student consultations ignored. The outcome of the 2020 protests revolve around demands for stronger SASH policy, accountability surrounding tariff rises, and commitments to adequate pastoral care; the outcome of these protests is as yet unknown. Protests have been held since on the issue, with one high-profile one occurring on the same day as the annual Open Day in 2024. \n\nANU alumni are often visible in government. Bob Hawke and Kevin Rudd , former Australian Prime Ministers , attended the university, as did senior politicians Annastacia Palaszczuk , Barry O'Farrell , Nick Minchin , Kim Beazley Sr , Peter Garrett , Craig Emerson , Stephen Conroy , Gary Gray , Warren Snowdon , Joe Ludwig and Catherine King and Michael Keenan . ANU has produced 30 current Australian Ambassadors , and more than a dozen current heads of Australian Public Service departments, including Prime Minister & Cabinet secretaries Michael Thawley and Martin Parkinson , Finance secretary Jane Halton , Education secretary Lisa Paul , Agriculture secretary Paul Grimes , Attorney-General's secretary Chris Moraitis, Environment secretary Gordon de Brouwer, Employment secretary Renee Leon, Social Services secretary Finn Pratt, Industry secretary Glenys Beauchamp, Treasury secretary Chris Higgins , Australian Secret Intelligence Service director-general Nick Warner and Australian Competition & Consumer Commission chairman Rod Sims . Graduates also include Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands Gordon Darcy Lilo , Foreign Minister of Mongolia Damdin Tsogtbaatar , former Indonesian Foreign Minister Marty Natalegawa , former Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Don Brash , former British Secretary of State for Health Patricia Hewitt and former U.S. Ambassador to Israel Martin Indyk .\n\nOther notable alumni include High Court of Australia judges Stephen Gageler and Geoffrey Nettle , Fijian archaeologist Tarisi Vunidilo , Wallisian member of the Congress of New Caledonia Ilaïsaane Lauouvéa , Chief Federal Magistrate John Pascoe , political journalist Stan Grant , human rights lawyer Jennifer Robinson , former Chief of Army David Morrison , Kellogg's CEO John Bryant , former Singapore Airlines CEO Cheong Choong Kong , Indiana University president Michael McRobbie , University of Melbourne Vice-Chancellors Alan Gilbert and Glyn Davis , mathematician John H. Coates , computer programmer Andrew Tridgell , public intellectual Clive Hamilton , journalist Bettina Arndt , and economists John Deeble , Ross Garnaut , Peter Drysdale , John Quiggin and commercial litigator Jozef Maynard Borja Erece, the youngest law graduate in Australian history.\n\nNotable past faculty include Mark Oliphant , Keith Hancock , Manning Clark , Derek Freeman , H. C. Coombs , Gareth Evans , John Crawford , Hedley Bull , Frank Fenner , C. P. Fitzgerald , Pierre Ryckmans , A. L. Basham , Bernhard Neumann , and former Indonesian Vice-president Boediono . Nobel Prizes have been awarded to former ANU Chancellor Howard Florey and faculty members John Eccles , John Harsanyi , Rolf M. Zinkernagel , Peter Doherty and Brian Schmidt . Notable present scholars include Hilary Charlesworth , Ian McAllister , Hugh White , Warwick McKibbin , Keith Dowding , Amin Saikal and Jeremy Shearmur .\n\nNotable Honorary Doctorate recipients have included former Australian public officials Stanley Bruce , Robert Menzies , Richard Casey , Angus Houston , Brendan Nelson , Owen Dixon , Australian notable persons Sidney Nolan , Norman Gregg , Charles Bean , foreign dignitaries Harold Macmillan , Lee Kuan Yew , Aung San Suu Kyi , Sheikh Hasina , K. R. Narayanan , Nelson Mandela , Desmond Tutu , Saburo Okita and notable foreign scientists John Cockcroft , Jan Hendrik Oort and Alexander R. Todd .\n\nIn September 2023, an ex-student stabbed two female students and assaulted a male student with a frying pan. There were several injuries but no fatalities. ANU Chancellor Julie Bishop later called for the ACT government to explain why the university was not informed of the risk beforehand. \n\nThe network of the university was subject to serious compromise from 9 November to 21 December 2018. ABC News reported that the initial breach occurred when a phishing message was previewed. After investigating, the university published a report on the incident. Cyber safety recommendations are generally applicable.",
  "A character actor is an actor known for playing unusual, eccentric or interesting characters in supporting roles , rather than leading ones. The term is somewhat abstract and open to interpretation. While all actors play \"characters\", the term character actor is often applied to an actor who frequently plays a distinctive and important supporting role. In another sense, a character actor may also be one who specializes in minor roles. [ citation needed ]\n\nA character actor may play a variety of characters in their career, often referred to as a \"chameleon\", or may be known for playing the same type of roles. Character actor roles are more substantial than bit parts or non-speaking extras . The term is used primarily to describe television and film actors, as opposed to theater actors. An early use of the term was in the 1883 edition of The Stage , which defined a character actor as \"one who portrays individualities and eccentricities\". Actors with a long career history of playing character roles may be difficult for audiences to recognize as being the same actor. \n\nIn contrast to leading actors , they are generally seen as less glamorous. While a leading actor often has the physical attractiveness considered necessary to play the love interest , a character actor typically does not. In fact, some character actors are known for their unusual looks. For example, Chicago character actor William Schutz's face was disfigured in a car accident when he was five years old, but his appearance after reconstructive surgery helped him to be distinctive to theater audiences. Generally, the names of character actors are not featured prominently in movie and television advertising on the marquee , since a character actor's name is not expected to attract film audiences. Some character actors have been described as instantly recognizable despite their names being little known. They are colloquially referred to as \"that guy\", or \"that guy\" actors, as in the 2014 documentary That Guy Dick Miller ; with a prime example of a \"that guy\" actor being John Carroll Lynch . \n\nOver the course of an acting career, an actor can sometimes shift between leading roles and supporting roles. Some leading actors, as they get older, find that access to leading roles is limited by their age. Sometimes character actors have developed careers based on specific talents needed in genre films, such as dancing, horsemanship, acrobatics, swimming ability, or boxing. Many up-and-coming actors find themselves typecast in character roles due to an early success with a particular part or in a certain genre, such that the actor becomes so strongly identified with a particular type of role that casting directors and theatrical agents steer the actor to similar roles. Some character actors are known as \"chameleons\", able to play roles that vary wildly, such as Gary Oldman and Christian Bale . \n\nMany character actors tend to play the same type of role throughout their careers, like Harvey Keitel as tough, determined characters; Christopher Lloyd as eccentrics; Claude Rains as sophisticated, sometimes morally ambiguous men; Abe Vigoda as aging criminals; Fairuza Balk as moody goth girls; Doug Jones as non-human creatures; and Forest Whitaker as composed characters with underlying volatility. Ed Lauter usually portrayed a menacing figure because of his \"long, angular face\", which was easily recognized in public, although audiences rarely knew his name. Character actors can play a variety of types, such as the femme fatale , gunslinger , sidekick , town drunk , villain , hooker with a heart of gold , and many others. Prolific character actors, such as Margo Martindale , are rarely out of work, and they often have long careers that span decades. They are often highly esteemed by fellow actors. ",
  "A bed skirt , sometimes spelled bedskirt , a bed ruffle , a dust ruffle in North America , a valance , or a valance sheet in the British Isles , is a piece of decorative fabric that is placed between the mattress and the box spring of a bed that extends to the floor around the sides. In addition to its aesthetics , a bed skirt is used to hide the ensemble fabric, wheels and other unsightly objects underneath the bed, or as protection against dust . \n\nPopularized in the early 20th century , though dating back to the late 18th century in their earliest usage, valances were strictly utilitarian up until the 1930s and 1940s, when many women began to lavishly decorate their bedrooms. For about a century, bed skirts have been considered as intrinsic pieces of bedding and as crucial as the bedcover itself. Bed skirts generally measure between 14 inches (36 cm) and 16 inches (41 cm) in their drop. \n\nAlthough bed skirts became more generally used from the early 1900s, artworks of bedrooms in the Regency , Georgian and Victorian eras displayed beds with fancy valances, typically in upper class or royal settings. \n\nIn the early 1900s, conventional cotton and coil mattresses with coordinated box springs supplanted wool or feather-filled mattresses. Valances were initially used to block drafts which could chill the undersides of beds (from the floor upwards). They were also used to conceal box springs , bed frames and badly shaped bed posts. Furthermore, people who had bed skirts discovered that bed bugs and dust mites were a minor issue in their homes as the valance averted dust. \n\nBetween the 1920s and 1930s, women adorned beds with more choices than ever, where traditional bedding components began to include valances. In the 1940s, the bedspread and valance was popular. In children's rooms, the valances stored or hid toys and assorted items beneath the bed. \n\nUp until the 1960s, fabrics and materials such as cotton, satin , chiffon , and wool were fashionable bed skirt cloths. Towards the 1970s and 1980s, the term \"dust ruffles\" was superseded by \"bed skirt\". From the 1980s and onwards, valances were still pivotal to the bedroom's general décor. \n\nIn recent years, tailored, or pleated bed skirts have become more efficient. Springmaid , Martha Stewart , Sears , JCPenney and Laura Ashley were some bed skirt-making brands popular with consumers within the last three decades. By the late 2010s, valance styles such as ruching , lace , and ruffle declined in use as minimalists popularized the straight bed skirt. More recently, mattresses are getting thicker in size and therefore bed skirts are becoming more uncommon, as such bulky mattresses tend to touch the floor. \n\nValances can preserve the bed by keeping it from coming into contact with the floor. They can act as a buffer to preserve the unity of linens and bedding, since continual friction between the bed and the ground may lead to tearing or wearing down of material; therefore sheets and bedspreads will reduce quality over time. They are also used to prevent dust and allergens from accumulating under the bed, particularly by those who suffer from respiratory problems . \n\nAesthetically, the valance's function is to provide a snazzy look to a bed, in addition to reducing exposure to the box spring, assorted items, clutter or any space beneath the bed that can be used for storage . Embellished bed boots may be used to conceal bed posts and improve the décor when the bed skirts do not reach the floor. Valances can also be used to increase the aesthetics of the bedroom that complements the surrounding decoration. Some bed skirts can also be adjusted, depending on the size of the mattresses. \n\nThere are threes types of bed skirts: \n\nGenerally, there exists a base valance; which is placed below the mattress and covers the bottom of the bed. And a sheet valance; which is fitted over the mattress, where it acts as both a fitted sheet and a bed skirt. ",
  "A children's film , or family film , is a film genre that generally relates to children in the context of home and family. Children's films are made specifically for children and not necessarily for a general audience, while family films are made for a wider appeal with a general audience in mind. Children's films come in several major genres like realism , fantasy , adventure , war , musicals , comedy , and literary adaptations . \n\nChildren are born with certain innate biological dispositions as a product of long evolutionary history . This provides an underlying biological framework for what may fascinate a child and also impose limitations on the same. These can be seen in certain universal features shared in children's films. According to Grodal, films like Finding Nemo (2003), Bambi (1942), or Hayao Miyazaki 's Spirited Away (2001) are based on certain strong emotions like fear, that lead to the activation of what Boyer and Lienard called the hazard-precaution system. This enables the brain to take precautions in case of danger. Children's films such as these explore various topics such as: attachment to parenting agency ; the development of friendship; reciprocal relationships between individuals; or deal with the necessity or need in children and young people to explore and to engage in play . Thus these diverse films deal with certain aspects that are not mere social constructions, but rather emotions relevant to all children and therefore have an appeal to a wider universal audience. While cultural aspects shape how various films are created, these films refer to underlying universal aspects that are innate and biological. University of Melbourne scholar Timothy Laurie criticises the emphasis placed on children's innate psychic tendencies, noting that \"pedagogical norms have been tirelessly heaped onto children's media\", and that rather than deriving from hardwired biology, \"the quality of childhood is more likely shaped by social policy, political opportunism, pedagogical institutions, and youth-specific market segmentation \". \n\nIn the United States and Europe, the idea of children's films began to gain relative prominence in the 1930s. According to Bazalgette and Staples, the term \"family film\" is essentially an American expression while \"children's film\" is considered to be a European expression. The difference between the terms can be seen in casting methods adopted by American and European films respectively. In American family films, the search for a child protagonist involves casting children who meet a specific criterion or standard for physical appearance. In contrast, European children's films look to cast children who appear \"ordinary\". Similarly, in American family films, the adult cast can be composed of well known actors or actresses in an effort to attract a wider audience, presenting narratives from an adult or parental perspective. This is shown through the casting, content of the plot , editing, and even mise-en-scène . According to Bazalgette and Staples, a fine example of a family film is Honey, I Shrunk the Kids (1989), which if it were a European children's film with a similar plot, the title would be Sis, Dad Shrunk Us , explaining that European children's films are told from the child's perspective, portraying the story through the various emotions and experiences of the child. Because of these differences, American family films are more easily marketable toward domestic and international viewing audiences while European children's films are better received domestically with limited appeal to international audiences. \n\nThe Walt Disney Company made animated adaptations of Grimms' Fairy Tales before World War II , beginning with Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937). The period immediately before and during World War II saw the release of three significant family films in the U.S. These were Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs by Disney, Gulliver's Travels by Fleischer Studios , and Pinocchio (1940), also by Disney. All of these were loose adaptations of literary sources. \n\nAfter the war, Disney continued to make animated features that could be classified as family films given the scope of its content. According to Wojcik, the most important film adaptations of children's literature in the immediate post-World War II period were the motion pictures The Diary of Anne Frank by George Stevens (1959), Treasure Island (1950) by Byron Haskin and Luigi Comencini 's 1952 motion picture Heidi . \n\nIn the 1960s, motion pictures such as To Kill a Mockingbird (1962) and Oliver! (1968), directed by Carol Reed , portrayed children as naturally innocent. Other films of the 1960s that involved children include The Sound of Music (1965) by Robert Wise and The Miracle Worker (1962). These were very successful musical motion picture that were in the genre of family films. Four of the top ten highest-grossing films of the decade were family films: The Sound of Music , One Hundred and One Dalmatians (1961), The Jungle Book (1967), and Mary Poppins (1964). Hollywood also released motion pictures starring children though these were not commercially successful and they were literary adaptations nonetheless. These include ...And Now Miguel (1966), Doctor Dolittle (1967), and The Learning Tree (1969). Other family/children films of the decade include Pollyanna (1960), Swiss Family Robinson (1960), In Search of the Castaways (1962), The Sword in the Stone (1963), That Darn Cat! (1965), Up the Down Staircase (1967), To Sir, With Love (1967), Yours, Mine and Ours (1968), and The Parent Trap (1961). \n\nChildren's films in the 1970s from the United States include animated films such as The Aristocats (1970), Charlotte's Web (1973), Robin Hood (1973), The Rescuers (1977), and The Hobbit (1977). The decade also had live action children's films like Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971), Sounder (1972), Benji (1974), Tuck Everlasting (1976), The Bad News Bears (1976), Freaky Friday (1976), and A Hero Ain't Nothin' but a Sandwich (1978), the divorce drama involving a child Kramer vs. Kramer (1978), and The Muppet Movie (1979). There were also combination live action/animation films such as 1971's Bedknobs and Broomsticks and Pete's Dragon (1977). This trend of films inspired the 1980s and 1990s productions of classic children's films from America including Beauty and the Beast (1991) and Matilda (1996). \n\nAmerican children's and family films of the 1980s include Popeye (1980), The Fox and the Hound (1981), Steven Spielberg 's E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982), The Great Mouse Detective (1986), and The Little Mermaid (1989). Spielberg portrays children realistically, having to cope with issues. This is seen in E.T. the Extra Terrestrial , where the children have to cope with the issues of single parenting and divorce, as well as separation from their father. Also, in the motion picture Empire of the Sun (1987), the protagonist child Jim Graham has to deal with separation from his parents for years, to the point where he is unable to even remember what his mother looked like. He is wounded not by bullets, but by the madness and cruelty of war and separation from his parents. According to Robin Wood, in their films, Lucas and Spielberg both reconstruct \"... the adult spectator as a child ...\" or \"... an adult who would like to be a child\". Other important children's films from the U.S. in the late 1970s include Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977). Live action films like Superman (1978) and Superman II are also important children's and family films. They have been ranked as some of the best family entertainment over the past generation. The 1970s and 1980s also include several films and their sequels as classics of family films, including: Star Wars (1977) and its sequels The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Return of the Jedi (1983). Other similar movies and sequels include Robert Zemeckis 's film Back to the Future (1985) and its sequels Back to the Future Part II (1989) and Back to the Future Part III (1990). \n\n\"Since the resurgence of Disney feature films with The Little Mermaid (1989)\", writes Laurie, \"high-budget animations have become part of the Hollywood box office furniture, with phenomenal successes from Pixar Studios, DreamWorks animations and more recently, Blue Sky Studios\". Important animated family films of the 1990s include Disney titles such as Beauty and the Beast (1991), Aladdin (1992), The Lion King (1994), Mulan (1998), The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996), and the Pixar animated films Toy Story (1995), its sequel Toy Story 2 (1999), and A Bug's Life (1998). This decade introduced the modern fairy tale film Edward Scissorhands (1990), depicting an isolated, artificially created young man with human emotions and childlike qualities who is ultimately rejected by society while the female protagonist holds on to his memory. The 1990s also saw additional live-action family films such as Back to the Future Part III (1990), which brought the Back to the Future franchise into this decade, Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1990), Home Alone (1990) and its sequel Home Alone 2: Lost in New York (1992), Hook (1991), Alan & Naomi (1992), Jurassic Park (1993), Steve Zaillian 's Searching for Bobby Fischer (1993), Super Mario Bros. (1993), Mrs. Doubtfire (1993), The Flintstones (1994), Babe (1995), Jumanji (1995), 101 Dalmatians (1996), Fly Away Home (1996), Vegas Vacation (1997), and October Sky (1999). Films such as A Little Princess (1995) were more successful in the home video market than in theaters. Direct-to-video became important for both animated and live-action films, such as The Return of Jafar (1994), and those starring Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen . \n\nIn the 1930s and 1940s, a children's film studio was set up in Moscow . Several films were imported from this studio to the United Kingdom including The Magic Fish , The Land of Toys , and The Humpbacked Horse . Post World War II children's films include the Italian neorealist film Bicycle Thieves , by Vittorio De Sica (1948). According to Goldstein and Zornow, Clement's French film, Forbidden Games (1952), features children in the scenario of war, and shows the gap between children and adults. This period also includes the Czech children's film Journey to the Beginning of Time (1955), directed by Karel Zeman . In the 1960s, important European children's films include the British-Italian romance film Romeo and Juliet (1968), and the French film L'Enfant sauvage (1969). French film directors Louis Malle and François Truffaut made significant contributions to children's films. Louis Malle made the films Zazie dans le Métro (1960), Murmur of the Heart (1971), and Pretty Baby (1978). The works of Truffaut include The 400 Blows (1959), The Wild Child (1970) and Small Change (1976). The film making style of Malle and Truffaunt inspired present day directors in making children's films; including Ponette (1996) directed by Jacques Doillon , which deals with the emotional and psychological pain and hurt that children experience \"... while living without parental love and care\". Other important European children's cinema in the 1960s include The Christmas Tree (1969), which tells the story of a child coping with his imminent death due to leukemia , and Robert Bresson 's film Mouchette (1964), which deals with the suicide of a 14-year-old girl. According to Wojcik, the contrast between films like Mary Poppins and Mouchette shows the ambiguous or schizoid nature of the depiction of children in the 1960s. \n\nEuropean children's films from the 1970s and 1980s include: the German film directed by Wim Wenders , Alice in den Städten (1974); the Spanish film The Spirit of the Beehive (1973); Fanny & Alexander directed by Ingmar Bergman ; the Danish film Pelle the Conqueror (1988); The NeverEnding Story (1984), directed by German director Wolfgang Petersen ; the Danish film , Me and Mamma Mia (1989); and the Hungarian film Love, Mother (1987). Autumn Sonata by Ingmar Bergman is also an important cinema in the genre of family films, although it deals with issues between parent and child which the child expresses after reaching adulthood. The 1990s include the important Russian films Burnt by the Sun (1994) and The Thief (1997), both of which are set in post-revolutionary Russia of 1917. In the 2000s, important European children's films include the Finnish film Mother of Mine (2005), the Italian short film Il supplente (\"The Substitute\") (2007), and the Polish animated film Peter and the Wolf (2006). In 2010s the Belgian, French language film, The Kid with a Bike (2011) stands as an important children's film. \n\nIn the 1960s, the UK made motion pictures dealing with children that are now regarded as classics. These films include The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner (1962), Lord of the Flies (1963), Born Free (1966), To Sir, with Love (1967) (based on E. R. Braithwaite 's real experiences), and if.... (1968). The list also includes the film Kes (1969). Some children's motion pictures belong to the category of avant-garde films because of the unconventional and often controversial treatment of the subject. According to film scholars; an important example of an avant-garde children's film is the British film Pink Floyd The Wall (1982). Pink Floyd The Wall is an unconventional and controversial motion picture that has a haunting and powerful nightmarish depiction of alienated childhood, boarding school separation, maternal deprivation , separation anxiety , war, and consumerist greed that affects a child and further affects his relationships and experiences in adulthood. It shows the child with non traditional images and the social changes that has occurred with family. In Pink Floyd The Wall the representation of child and family \"stresses confrontation, confusion, dysfunctionality and history\". \n\nIn the 1960s, important children's films from Japan include Bad Boys (1960), based on the lives of children in a reform school for juvenile delinquents, and Boy (1969). In the 1960s, important children's films from Asia include the film Goopy Gyne Bagha Byne (1969) by Satyajit Ray . South India gave us the children's film Daisy (1988), depicting children in a boarding school and their experience of separation and longing. Other children's films from this region also include Abhayam (1991), which is also known by the alternative title, Shelter , by Sivan . It was awarded the Silver Elephant and Special International Jury & CIFEJ Jury Awards at the 7th International Children's Film Festival. India also has a neo-realist children's film about street children in Mumbai, Salaam Bombay (1988) by Mira Nair . It depicts the cruel way in which adults treat children in India by showing the hard life of street children in Mumbai (also called as Bombay). Important children's films from India also include the Bollywood films Masoom (1983) and Mr. India (1987); both directed by Shekhar Kapoor . Other important children's films include the reproduction of the German Fairy tales of the Grimm brothers by the Israeli film companies Golan Globus and Cannon Films in their series called Cannon Movie Tales , which includes: The Frog Prince (1986), starring Aileen Quinn , Helen Hunt , and John Paragon ; Beauty and the Beast (1987), starring John Savage ; and Puss in Boots (1988), starring Christopher Walken . From Japan, Miyazaki's Spirited Away was voted as the number one film that must be seen by 14 years of age. That list also included the Māori film Whale Rider (2002). Another important children's film is Son of Maryam (1998), directed by Hamid Jebeli and set in Azerbaijan . It deals with the relationship between a Muslim boy and an Armenian priest. \n\nChildren's films from South Africa include Tsotsi (2006). Another collection of family films is the anthology of 20 Canadian and European motion picture productions titled Tales for All . This includes the Canadian children's film Bach and Broccoli (Bach et Bottine) (1986) and the Argentine film Summer of the Colt (1990), directed by André Mélancon . ",
  "A musician is someone who composes , conducts , or performs music . According to the United States Employment Service , \"musician\" is a general term used to designate a person who follows music as a profession . Musicians include songwriters , who write both music and lyrics for songs ; conductors, who direct a musical performance; and performers, who perform for an audience. A music performer is generally either a singer (also known as a vocalist), who provides vocals, or an instrumentalist, who plays a musical instrument . Musicians may perform on their own or as part of a group, band or orchestra . Musicians can specialize in a musical genre , though many play a variety of different styles and blend or cross said genres, a musician's musical output depending on a variety of technical and other background influences including their culture, skillset, life experience, education, and creative preferences. A musician who records and releases music is often referred to as a recording artist ; while a musician who primarily writes and records art music , media soundtracks and scores—including for films , theatrical stage productions , and video games —or classical music is usually called a composer . A music producer , while not necesarilly a musician outright, may themselves be a musician. A conductor , by way of gestures, leads and provides live direction for, or conducts , an ensemble, typically an orchestra or choral group.\n\nA composer is a musician who creates musical compositions . The title is principally used for those who write classical music or film music . Those who write the music for popular songs may be called songwriters . Those who mainly write the words for songs may be referred to as lyricists .\n\nA conductor directs a musical performance; conducting has been defined as \"the art of directing the simultaneous performance of several players or singers by the use of gesture\". The conductor stands on a raised podium and communicates with the musicians through hand gestures or eye contact.\n\nExamples of performers include, but are not limited to, instrumentalists and singers who perform for an audience. A musician can perform as a solo artist or as a part of an ensemble (e.g. an orchestra , a choir or a pop group).\n\nA music producer plays a crucial role in shaping the sound of an album or song, overseeing the recording process, and guiding the overall creative direction. They often collaborate closely with artists, musicians, sound engineers, and other industry professionals.",
  "VJing (pronounced: VEE-JAY-ing ) is a broad designation for realtime visual performance. Characteristics of VJing are the creation or manipulation of imagery in realtime through technological mediation and for an audience, in synchronization to music. VJing often takes place at events such as concerts , nightclubs , music festivals and sometimes in combination with other performative arts. This results in a live multimedia performance that can include music, actors and dancers. The term VJing became popular in its association with MTV's Video Jockey but its origins date back to the New York club scene of the 1970s. In both situations VJing is the manipulation or selection of visuals, the same way DJing is a selection and manipulation of audio.\n\nOne of the key elements in the practice of VJing is the realtime mix of content from a \"library of media\", on storage media such as VHS tapes or DVDs, video and still image files on computer hard drives, live camera input, or from computer generated visuals. In addition to the selection of media, VJing mostly implies realtime processing of the visual material. The term is also used to describe the performative use of generative software, although the word \"becomes dubious ... since no video is being mixed\". \n\nHistorically, VJing gets its references from art forms that deal with the synesthetic experience of vision and sound. These historical references are shared with other live audiovisual art forms, such as Live Cinema, to include the camera obscura, the panorama and diorama, the magic lantern , color organ , and liquid light shows .\n\nThe color organ is a mechanism to make colors correspond to sound through mechanical and electromechanic means. Bainbridge Bishop, who contributed to the development of the color organ, was \"dominated with the idea of painting music\". In a book from 1893 that documents his work, Bishop states: \"I procured an organ, and experimented by building an attachment to the keys, which would play with different colored lights to correspond with the music of the instrument.\" \n\nBetween 1919 and 1927, Mary Hallock-Greenewalt , a piano soloist, created a new technological art form called Nourathar , which means \"essence of light\" in Arabic. Her light music consisted of environmental color fields that produced a scale of light intensities and color. \"In place of a keyboard, the Sarabet had a console with graduated sliders and other controls, more like a modern mixing board. Lights could be adjusted directly via the sliders, through the use of a pedal, and with toggle switches that worked like individual keys.\" \n\nIn clubs and private events in the 1960s \"people used liquid-slides, disco balls and light projections on smoke to give the audience new sensations. Some of these experiments were linked to the music, but most of the time they functioned as decorations.\" These came to be known as liquid light shows .\nFrom 1965 to 1966 in San Francisco, the visual shows by artist collectives such as The Joshua Light Show and the Brotherhood of Light accompanied The Grateful Dead concerts, which were inspired by the Beat generation —in particular the Merry Pranksters —and fueled by the \"expansion of consciousness\" from the Acid Tests .\n\nThe Exploding Plastic Inevitable , between 1966 and 1967, organized by Andy Warhol contributed to the fusion of music and visuals in a party context. \"The Exploding Party project examined the history of the party as an experimental artistic format, focusing in particular on music visualization - also in live contexts\" \n\nDuring the late 1970s video and music performance became more tightly integrated. At concerts, a few bands started to have regular film/video along with their music. Experimental film maker Tony Potts was considered an unofficial member of The Monochrome Set for his work on lighting design and film making for projections for live shows. Test Department initially worked with \"Bert\" Turnball as their resident visual artist, creating slideshows and film for live performances. The organization, Ministry of Power included collaborations with performance groups, traditional choirs and various political activists. Industrial bands would perform in art contexts, as well as in concert halls, and often with video projections. Groups like Cabaret Voltaire started to use low cost video editing equipment to create their own time-based collages for their sound works. In their words, \"before [the use of video], you had to do collages on paper, but now you present them in rhythm—living time—in video.\" [ citation needed ] The film collages made by and for groups such as the Test Dept , Throbbing Gristle and San Francisco's Tuxedomoon became part of their live shows.\n\nAn example of mixing film with live performance is that of Public Image Ltd. at the Ritz Riot in 1981. This club, located on the East 9th St in New York, had a state of the art video projection system. It was used to show a combination of prerecorded and live video on the club's screen. PiL played behind this screen with lights rear projecting their shadows on to the screen. Expecting a more traditional rock show, the audience reacted by pelting the projection screen with beer bottles and eventually pulling down the screen. \n\nAn artist retreat in Owego New York called Experimental Television Center , founded in 1971, made contributions to the development of many artists by gathering the experimental hardware created by video art pioneers: Nam June Paik , Steve Rutt and Bill Etra , and made the equipment available to artists in an inviting setting for free experimentation. Many of the outcomes debuted at the nightclub Hurrah which quickly became a new alternative for video artists who could not get their avant garde productions aired on regular broadcast outlets. Similarly, music video development was happening in other major cities around the world, providing an alternative to mainstream television.\n\nA notable image processor is the Sandin Image Processor (1971), primarily as it describes what is now commonly referred to as open source .\n\nThe Dan Sandin Image Processor, or \"IP,\" is an analog video processor with video signals sent through processing modules that route to an output color encoder. The IP's most unique attribute is its non-commercial philosophy, emphasizing a public access to processing methods and the machines that assist in generating the images. The IP was Sandin's electronic expression for a culture that would \"learn to use High-Tech machines for personal, aesthetic, religious, intuitive, comprehensive, and exploratory growth.\" This educational goal was supplemented with a \"distribution religion\" that enabled video artists, and not-for-profit groups, to \"roll-your-own\" video synthesizer for only the cost of parts and the sweat and labor it took to build it. It was the \" Heathkit \" of video art tools, with a full building plan spelled out, including electronic schematics and mechanical assembly information. Tips on soldering, procuring electronic parts and Printed Circuit boards, were also included in the documentation, increasing the chances of successfully building a working version of the video synthesizer.\n\nIn May 1980, multi media artist / filmmaker Merrill Aldighieri was invited to screen a film at the nightclub Hurrah. At this time, music video clips did not exist in large quantity and the video installation was used to present an occasional film. To bring the role of visuals to an equal level with the DJ's music, Merrill made a large body of ambient visuals that could be combined in real time to interpret the music. Working alongside the DJ, this collection of raw visuals was mixed in real time to create a non-stop visual interpretation of the music. Merrill became the world's first full-time VJ. MTV founders came to this club and Merrill introduced them to the term and the role of \"VJ\", inspiring them to have VJ hosts on their channel the following year. Merrill collaborated with many musicians at the club, notably with electronic musician Richard Bone to make the first ambient music video album titled \"Emerging Video\". Thanks to a grant from the Experimental Television Center, her blend of video and 16 mm film bore the influential mark of the unique Rutt Etra and Paik synthesizers. This film was offered on VHS through \"High Times Magazine\" and was featured in the club programming. Her next foray into the home video audience was in collaboration with the newly formed arm of Sony, Sony HOME VIDEO, where she introduced the concept of \"breaking music on video\" with her series DANSPAK. With a few exceptions like the Jim Carrol Band with Lou Reed and Man Parrish, this series featured unknown bands, many of them unsigned.\n\nThe rise of electronic music (especially in house and techno genres) and DJ club culture provided more opportunities for artists to create live visuals at events. The popularity of MTV lead to greater and better production of music videos for both broadcast and VHS , and many clubs began to show music videos as part of entertainment and atmosphere.\n\nJoe Shannahan (owner of Metro in 1989–1990) was paying artists for video content on VHS. Part of the evening they would play MTV music videos and part of the evening they would run mixes from local artists Shanahan had commissioned. \n\nMedusa's (an all-ages bar in Chicago) incorporated visuals as part of their nightly art performances throughout the early to mid 80s (1983–85). Also in Chicago during the mid-80s was Smart Bar, where Metro held \"Video Metro\" every Saturday night. \n\nIn the 1980s the development of relatively cheap transistor and integrated circuit technology allowed the development of digital video effects hardware at a price within reach of individual VJs and nightclub owners.\n\nOne of the first commercially distributed video synthesizers available in 1981 was the CEL Electronics Chromascope sold for use in the developing nightclub scene. The Fairlight Computer Video Instrument (CVI), first produced in 1983, was revolutionary in this area, allowing complex digital effects to be applied in real time to video sources. The CVI became popular amongst television and music video producers and features in a number of music videos from the period. The Commodore Amiga introduced in 1985 made a breakthrough in accessibility for home computers and developed the first computer animation programs for 2D and 3D animation that could produce broadcast results on a desktop computer.\n\nA number of recorded works begin to be published in the 1990s to further distribute the work of VJs, such as the Xmix compilations (beginning in 1993), Future Sound of London 's \"Lifeforms\"(VHS, 1994), Emergency Broadcast Network 's \"Telecommunication Breakdown\" (VHS, 1995), Coldcut and Hexstatic 's \"Timber\" (VHS, 1997 and then later on CDRom including a copy of VJamm VJ software), the \"Mego Videos\" compilation of works from 1996 to 1998 (VHS/PAL, 1999) and Addictive TV 's 1998 television series \"Transambient\" for the UK's Channel 4 (and DVD release).\n\nIn the United States, the emergence of the rave scene is perhaps to be credited for the shift of the VJ scene from nightclubs into underground parties. From around 1991 until 1994, Mark Zero would do film loops at Chicago raves and house parties. One of the earliest large-scale Chicago raves was \"Massive New Years Eve Revolution\" in 1993, produced by Milwaukee's Drop Bass Network. It was a notable event as it featured the Optique Vid Tek (OVT) VJs on the bill. This event was followed by Psychosis, held on 3 April 1993, and headlined by Psychic TV , with visuals by OVT Visuals. In San Francisco Dimension 7 were a VJ collective working the early West Coast rave scene beginning in 1993. Between 1996 and 1998, Dimension 7 took projectors and lasers to the Burning Man festival, creating immersive video installations on the Black Rock desert.\n\nIn the UK groups such as The Light Surgeons and Eikon were transforming clubs and rave events by combining the old techniques of liquid lightshows with layers of slide, film and video projections. In Bristol, Children of Technology emerged, pioneering interactive immersive environments stemming from co-founder Mike Godfrey's architectural thesis whilst at university during the 1980s. Children of Technology integrated their homegrown CGI animation and video texture library with output from the interactive Virtual Light Machine (VLM), the brainchild of Jeff Minter and Dave Japp, with output onto over 500 sq m of layered screens using high power video and laser projection within a dedicated lightshow. Their \"Ambient Theatre Lightshow\" first emerged at Glastonbury 93 and they also provided VJ visuals for the Shamen, who had just released their no 1. hit \"Ebeneezer Goode\" at the festival. Invited musicians jammed in the Ambient Theatre Lightshow, using the VLM, within a prototype immersive environment. Children of Technology took interactive video concepts into a wide range of projects including show production for \"Obsession\" raves between 1993 and 1995, theatre, clubs, advertising, major stage shows and TV events. This included pioneering projects with 3D video / sound recording and performance, and major architectural projects in the late 1990s, where many media technology ideas were now taking hold. Another collective, \" Hex \" were working across a wide range of media - from computer games to art exhibitions - the group pioneered many new media hybrids, including live audiovisual jamming, computer-generated audio performances, and interactive collaborative instruments. This was the start of a trend which continues today with many VJs working beyond the club and dance party scene in areas such as installation art.\n\nThe Japanese book VJ2000 (Daizaburo Harada, 1999) marked one of the earliest publications dedicated to discussing the practices of VJs.\n\nThe combination of the emerging rave scene, along with slightly more affordable video technology for home-entertainment systems, brought consumer products to become more widely used in artistic production. However, costs for these new types of video equipment were still high enough to be prohibitive for many artists.\n\nThere are three main factors that lead to the proliferation of the VJ scene in the 2000s:\n\nAs a result of these, the VJ scene saw an explosion of new artists and styles. These conditions also facilitated a sudden emergence of a less visible (but nonetheless strong) movement of artists who were creating algorithmic, generative visuals.\n\nThis decade saw video technology shift from being strictly for professional film and television studios to being accessible for the prosumer market (e.g. the wedding industry, church presentations, low-budget films, and community television productions).These mixers were quickly adopted by VJs as the core component of their performance setups. This is similar to the release of the Technics 1200 turntables, which were marketed towards homeowners desiring a more advanced home entertainment system, but were then appropriated by musicians and music enthusiasts for experimentation. Initially, video mixers were used to mix pre-prepared video material from VHS players and live camera sources, and later to add the new computer software outputs into their mix. The 90s saw the development of a number of digital video mixers such as Panasonic's WJ-MX50 , WJ-MX12, and the Videonics MX-1 .\n\nEarly desktop editing systems such as the NewTek Video Toaster for the Amiga computer were quickly put to use by VJs seeking to create visuals for the emerging rave scene, whilst software developers began to develop systems specifically designed for live visuals such as O'Wonder's \"Bitbopper\". \n\nThe first known software for VJs was Vujak - created in 1992 and written for the Mac by artist Brian Kane for use by the video art group he was part of - Emergency Broadcast Network , though it was not used in live performances.EBN used the EBN VideoSampler v2.3, developed by Mark Marinello and Greg Deocampo. In the UK, Bristol's Children of Technology developed a dedicated immersive video lightshow using the Virtual Light Machine (VLM) called AVLS or Audio-Visual-Live-System during 1992 and 1993. The VLM was a custom built PC by video engineer Dave Japp using super-rare transputer chips and modified motherboards, programmed by Jeff Minter (Llamasoft & Virtual Light Co.). The VLM developed after Jeff's earlier Llamasoft Light Synthesiser programme. With VLM, DI's from live musicians or DJ's activated Jeff's algorithmic real-time video patterns, and this was real-time mixed using pansonic video mixers with CGI animation/VHS custom texture library and live camera video feedback. Children of Technology developed their own \"Video Light\" system, using hi-power and low-power video projection to generate real-time 3D beam effects, simultaneous with enormous surface and mapped projection. The VLM was used by the Shamen, The Orb, Primal Scream, Obsession, Peter Gabriel, Prince and many others between 1993 and 1996. A software version of the VLM was integrated into Atari's Jaguar console, in response to growing VJ interest. In the mid-90s, Audio reactive pure synthesis (as opposed to clip-based) software such as Cthugha and Bomb were influential.By the late 90s there were several PC based VJing software available, including generative visuals programs such as MooNSTER , Aestesis , and Advanced Visualization Studio , as well as video clip players such as FLxER, created by Gianluca Del Gobbo, and VJamm.\n\nProgramming environments such as Max/MSP , Macromedia Director and later Quartz Composer started to become used by themselves and also to create VJing programs like VDMX or pixmix . These new software products and the dramatic increases in computer processing power over the decade meant that VJs were now regularly taking computers to gigs.\n\nThe new century has brought new dynamics to the practice of visual performance. To be a VJ previously had largely meant a process of self-invention in isolation from others: the term was not widely known. Then through the rise of internet adoption, having access to other practitioners very became the norm, and virtual communities quickly formed. The sense of collective then translated from the virtual world onto physical spaces. This becomes apparent through the numerous festivals that emerge all over Europe with strong focus on VJing.\n\nThe VideA festival in Barcelona ran from 2000 to 2005. AVIT , clear in its inception as the online community of VJCentral.com self-organising a physical presence, had its first festival in Leeds (2002), followed by Chicago (2003), Brighton (2003), San Francisco (2004), and Birmingham (2005), 320x240 in Croatia (2003), Contact Europe in Berlin (2003). Also, the Cimatics festival in Brussels should be credited as a pioneering event, with a first festival edition in 2002 completely dedicated to VJing. In 2003, the Finnish media arts festival PixelAche was dedicated to the topic of VJing, while in 2003, Berlin's Chaos Computer Club started a collaboration with AVIT organisers that featured VJ Camps and Congress strands. LPM - Live Performers Meeting was born in Rome in 2004, with the aim to offer a real meeting space for often individually working artists, a place to meet the fellow VJ artists, spin-off new projects, and share all VJing related experiences, software, questions and insights. LPM since has become one of the leading international meetings dedicated to artists, professionals and enthusiasts of VJing, visual and live video performance, counting its 20th edition in 2019. Also around this time (in 2005 and 2007), UK artists Addictive TV teamed up with the British Film Institute to produce Optronica , a crossover event showcasing audiovisual performances at the London IMAX cinema and BFI Southbank .\n\nTwo festivals entirely dedicated to VJing, Mapping Festival in Geneva and Vision'R in Paris, held their first edition in 2005.As these festivals emerged that prominently featured VJs as headline acts (or the entire focus of the festival), the rave festival scene also began to regularly include VJs in their main stage lineups with varying degrees of prominence.\n\nThe MUTEK festival (2000–present) in Montréal regularly featured VJs alongside experimental sound art performances, and later the Elektra Festival (2008–present) also emerged in Montréal and featured many VJ performances. In Perth, Australia, the Byte Me! festival (2007) showed the work of many VJs from the Pacific Rim area alongside new media theorists and design practitioners.\n\nWith lesser funding [ citation needed ] , the US scene has been host to more workshops and salons than festivals. Between 2000 and 2006, Grant Davis (VJ Culture) and Jon Schwark of Dimension 7 produced \"Video Salon\", a regular monthly gathering significant in helping establish and educate a strong VJ community in San Francisco, and attended by VJs across California and the United States. In addition, they produced an annual \"Video RIOT!\" (2003–2005) as a political statement following the R.A.V.E. Act ( Reducing Americans' Vulnerability to Ecstasy Act ) of 2003; a display of dissatisfaction by the re-election of George W. Bush in 2004; and in defiance of a San Francisco city ordinance limiting public gatherings in 2005.\n\nSeveral VJ battles and competitions began to emerge during this time period, such as Video Salon's \" SIGGRAPH VJ Battle\" in San Diego (2003), Videocake's \"AV Deathmatch\" series in Toronto (2006) and the \"VJ Contests\" at the Mapping Festival in Geneva (2009). These worked much like a traditional DJ battle where VJs would be given a set amount of time to show off their best mixes and were judged according to several criteria by a panel of judges.\n\nDatabases of visual content and promotional documentation became available on DVD formats and online through personal websites and through large databases, such as the \" Prelinger Archives \" on Archive.org . Many VJs began releasing digital video loop sets on various websites under Public Domain or Creative Commons licensing for other VJs to use in their mixes, such as Tom Bassford's \"Design of Signage\" collection (2006), Analog Recycling's \"79 VJ Loops\" (2006), VJzoo's \"Vintage Fairlight Clips\" (2007) and Mo Selle's \"57 V.2\" (2007).\n\nPromotional and content-based DVDs began to emerge, such as the works from the UK's ITV1 television series Mixmasters (2000–2005) produced by Addictive TV , Lightrhythm Visuals (2003), Visomat Inc. (2002), and Pixdisc , all of which focused on the visual creators, VJ styles and techniques. These were then later followed by NOTV , Atmospherix , and other labels. Mia Makela curated a DVD collection for Mediateca of Caixa Forum called \"LIVE CINEMA\" in 2007, focusing on the emerging sister practice of \"live cinema\". Individual VJs and collectives also published DVDs and CD-ROMs of their work, including Eclectic Method's bootleg video mix (2002) and Eclectic Method's \"We're Not VJs\" (2005), as well as eyewash's \"DVD2\" (2004) and their \"DVD3\" (2008).\n\nBooks reflecting on the history, technical aspects, and theoretical issues began to appear, such as \"The VJ Book: Inspirations and Practical Advice for Live Visuals Performance\" (Paul Spinrad, 2005), \"VJ: Audio-Visual Art and VJ Culture\" (Michael Faulkner and D-Fuse, 2006), \"vE-jA: Art + Technology of Live Audio-Video\" (Xárene Eskandar [ed], 2006), and \"VJ: Live Cinema Unraveled\" (Tim Jaeger, 2006). The subject of VJ-DJ collaboration also started to become a subject of interest for those studying in the field of academic human–computer interaction (HCI).\n\nIn 2004, Pioneer released the DVJ-X1 DVD player, which allowed DJ's to scratch and manipulate videos like vinyl. In 2006 Pioneer released a successor unit, DVJ-1000, with similar functionality. Those video players have inspired DJ software makers to add video plugins to their software. The first example of this was Numark Virtual Vinyl , released in 2007, which had this option available. In 2008, Serato Scratch Live received the same option, called Video-SL. This allowed turntable manipulations of videos, and added more options to the Rane TTM-57SL mixer.\n\nThe availability and affordability of new consumer-level technology allowed many more people to get involved into VJing. The dramatic increase in computer processing power that became available facilitated more compact, yet often more complex setups, sometimes allowing VJs to bypass using a video mixer, using powerful computers running VJ software to control their mixing instead. However, many VJs continue to use video mixers with multiple sources, which allows flexibility for a wide range of input devices and a level of security against computer crashes or slowdowns in video playback due to overloading the CPU of computers due to the demanding nature of realtime video processing.\n\nToday's VJs have a wide choice of off the shelf hardware products, covering every aspect of visuals performance, including video sample playback (Korg Kaptivator), real-time video effects (Korg Entrancer) and 3D visual generation.\n\nThe widespread use of DVDs gave initiative for scratchable DVD players.\n\nMany new models of MIDI controllers became available during the 2000s, which allow VJs to use controllers based on physical knobs, dials, and sliders, rather than interact primarily with the mouse/keyboard computer interface.\n\nThere are also many VJs working with experimental approaches to working with live video. Open source graphical programming environments (such as Pure Data ) are often used to create custom software interfaces for performances, or to connect experimental devices to their computer for processing live data (for example, the IBVA EEG -reading brainwave unit, the Arduino microprocessor, or circuit bending children's toys).\n\nThe second half of this decade also saw a dramatic increase in display configurations being deployed, including widescreen canvases, multiple projections and video mapped onto the architectural form. This shift has been underlined by the transition from broadcast based technology - fixed until this decade firmly in the 4x3 aspect ratio specifications NTSC and PAL - to computer industry technology, where the varied needs of office presentation, immersive gaming and corporate video presentation have led to diversity and abundance in methods of output. Compared to the ~640x480i fixed format of NTSC/PAL, a contemporary laptop using DVI can output a great variety of resolutions up to ~2500px wide, and in conjunction with the Matrox TripleHead2Go can feed three different displays with an image coordinated across them all.\n\nA significant aspect of VJing is the use of technology, be it the re-appropriation of existing technologies meant for other fields, or the creation of new and specific ones for the purpose of live performance. The advent of video is a defining moment for the formation of the VJ (video jockey).\n\nOften using a video mixer, VJs blend and superimpose various video sources into a live motion composition.In recent years, electronic musical instrument makers have begun to make specialty equipment for VJing.\n\nVJing developed initially by performers using video hardware such as videocameras, video decks and monitors to transmit improvised performances with live input from cameras and even broadcast TV mixed with pre-recorded elements. This tradition lives on with many VJs using a wide range of hardware and software available commercially or custom made for and by the VJs.\n\nVJ hardware can be split into categories -\n\nThere are many types of software a VJ may use in their work, traditional NLE production tools such as Adobe Premiere , After Effects , and Apple's Final Cut Pro are used to create content for VJ shows.Specialist performance software is used by VJs to play back and manipulate video in real-time.\n\nVJ performance software is highly diverse, and include software which allows a computer to replace the role of an analog video mixer and output video across extended canvasses composed of multiple screens or projectors. Small companies producing dedicated VJ software such as Modul8 and Magic give VJs a sophisticated interface for real-time processing of multiple layers of video clips combined with live camera inputs, giving VJs a complete off the shelf solution so they can simply load in the content and perform. Some popular titles which emerged during the 2000s include Resolume, NuVJ.\n\nSome VJs prefer to develop software themselves specifically to suit their own performance style. Graphical programming environments such as Max/MSP/Jitter , Isadora , and Pure Data have developed to facilitate rapid development of such custom software without needing years of coding experience.\n\nThere are many types of configurations of hardware and software that a VJ may use to perform.\n\nSeveral research projects have been dedicated to the documentation and study of VJing from the reflective and theoretical point of view. Round tables, talks, presentations and discussions are part of festivals and conferences related to new media art, such as ISEA and Ars Electronica for example, as well as specifically related to VJing, as is the case of the Mapping Festival. Exchange of ideas through dialogue contributed to the shift of the discussion from issues related to the practicalities of production to more complex ideas and to the process and the concept. Subjects related to VJing are, but not exclusively: identity and persona (individual and collective), the moment as art, audience participation, authorship, networks, collaboration and narrative.\nThrough collaborative projects, visual live performance shift to a field of interdisciplinary practices.\n\nPeriodical publications, online and printed, launched special issues on VJing. This is the case of AMinima printed magazine, with a special issue on Live Cinema (which features works by VJs), and Vague Terrain (an online new media journal), with the issue The Rise of the VJ. ",
  "Lassi ( pronounced [ləsːi] ) is a yogurt –based beverage with a smoothie -like consistency. It has been called \"the most popular and traditional yogurt-based drink\" in India. It has also been described as the form in which yogurt \"is most cherished and unbeatably popular in [...] Punjab \", its \"best-loved summer drink\", and \"the air conditioner of the Punjab\". \n\nLassi originated in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent . The word 'lassi' means yogurt mixed with water in Punjabi and Hindi-Urdu . \n\nLassi is prepared by blending yogurt, water, and spices. In Punjab, the yogurt is traditionally made from water buffalo milk . However, variations of lassi can be prepared in different ways. Cumin and cardamom are the most common spices added to lassi. Lassi is traditionally served in a clay cup known as kulhar . \n\nNamkin or namkeen (salty) lassi is made by adding salt , black pepper , cumin , and sugar to the yogurt-water mixture. \n\nLassi masalewal (spicy lassi) is made by adding ingredients such as almonds , ginger , green chilies , and pistachios to namkin lassi. \n\nMeethi (sweet) lassi is made by adding cardamom , rosewater , and saffron to the yogurt-water mixture. \n\nBhang lassi is a cannabis-infused drink that contains bhang , a liquid derivative of cannabis , which has effects similar to other eaten forms of cannabis . It is legal in many parts of India and mainly sold during Holi , when pakoras containing bhang are also sometimes eaten. Uttar Pradesh is known to have licensed bhang shops, and in many places, one can buy bhang products and drink bhang lassis. \n\nFruits such as mangos and strawberries may be added to the yogurt-water mixture to yield, for example, mango lassi and strawberry lassi. "
]